W.A.Lewis on Development with Unlimited Supplies of Labor

W.A. Lewis,

“Economic Development with Unlimited Supplies of Labour”*
(1954)
1. This essay is written in the classical tradition, making the classical assumption,
and asking the classical question. The classics, from Smith to Marx, all assumed, or
argued, that an unlimited supply of labour was available at subsistence wages. They
then enquired how production grows through time. They found the answer in
capital accumulation, which they explained in terms of their analysis of the
distribution of income. Classical systems stems thus determined simultaneously
income distribution and income growth, with the relative prices of commodities as
a minor bye-product.
Interest in prices and in income distribution survived into the neo-classical era, but
labour ceased to be unlimited in supply, and the formal model of economic analysis
was no longer expected to explain the expansion of the system through time. These
changes of assumption and of interest served well enough in the European parts of
the world, where labour was indeed limited in supply, and where for the next half
century it looked as if economic expansion could indeed be assumed to be
automatic. On the other hand over the greater part of Asia labour is unlimited in
supply, and economic expansion certainly cannot be taken for granted. Asia’s
problems, however, attracted very few economists during the neo-classical era
(even the Asian economists themselves absorbed the assumptions and
preoccupations of European economics) and hardly any progress has been made for
nearly a century with the kind of economics which would throw light upon the
problems. of countries with surplus populations.
When Kevnes’ General Theory appeared, it was thought at first that this was the
.book which would illuminate the problems of countries with surplus labour, since
it assumed in unlimited supply of labour at the current price, and also, in its final
pages, made a few remarks on secular economic expansion. Further reflection,
however, revealed that Keynes’s book assumed not only that labour is unlimited in
supply, but also, and more fundamentally, that land and capital are unlimited in
supply-more fundamentally both in the short run sense that once the monetary tap is
turned the real limit to expansion is not physical resources but the limited supply of
labour, and also in the long run sense that secular expansion is embarrassed not by a
shortage but by a superfluity of saving. Given the Keynesian remedies the
neoclassical system comes into its own again. Hence, from the point of view of
countries with surplus labour, Keynesianism is only a footnote to
neoclassicism-albeit a long, important and fascinating footnote. The student of such
economies has therefore to work right back to the classical economists before he
finds an analytical framework into which he can relevantly fit his problems.
The purpose of this essay is thus to see what can be made of the classical
framework in solving problems of distribution, accumulation, and growth, first in a
closed and then in an open economy. It is not primarily an essay in the history of
economic doctrine, and will not therefore spend time on individual writers,
enquiring what they meant, or assessing its validity or truth. Our purpose is rather
to bring their framework up-to-date, in the light of modern knowledge, and to see
how far it then helps us to understand the contemporary problems of large areas of
the earth.

1
Space for Notes
↓

W.A.Lewis on Development with Unlimited Supplies of Labor
I. The Closed Economy.
2. We have to begin by elaborating the assumption of an unlimited supply of
labour, and by establishing that it is a useful assumption. We are not arguing, let it
be repeated; that this assumption should be made for all areas of the world. It is
obviously not true of the United Kingdom, or of North West Europe. It is not true
either of some of the countries usually now lumped together as under-developed;
for example there is an acute shortage of male labour in some parts of Africa and of
Latin America. On the other hand it is obviously relevant assumption for the
economies of Egypt, of India, or of Jamaica. Our present task is not to supersede
neo-classical economics, but merely to elaborate a different framework for those
countries which the neo-classical (and Keynesian) assumptions do not fit.
In the first place, an unlimited supply of labour may be said to exist in those
countries where population is so large relatively to capital and natural resources,
that there are large sectors of the economy where the marginal productivity of
labour is negligible, zero, or even negative. Several writers have drawn attention to
the existence of such “disguised” unemployment in the agricultural sector,
demonstrating in each case that the family holding is so small that if some members
of the family obtained other employment the remaining members could cultivate
the holding just as well (of course they would have to work harder: the argument
includes the proposition that they would be willing to work harder in these
circumstances). The phenomenon is not, however, by any means confined to the
countryside. Another large sector to which it applies is the whole range of casual
jobs-the workers on the docks, the young men who rush forward asking to carry
your bag as you appear, the jobbing gardener, and the like. These occupations
usually have a multiple of the number they need, each of them earning very small
sums from occasional employment ; frequently their number could be halved
without reducing output in this sector. Petty retail trading is also exactly of this
type; it is enormously expanded in overpopulated economies; each trader makes
only a few sales ; markets are crowded with stalls, and if the number of stalls were
greatly reduced the consumers would be no whit worse off-they might even be
better off, since retail margins might fall. Twenty years ago one could not write
these sentences without having to stop and explain why in these circumstances, the
casual labourers do not bid their earnings down to zero, or why the farmers’
product is not similarly all eaten up in rent, but these propositions present no terrors
to contemporary economists.
A little more explanation has to be given of those cases where the workers are
not self-employed, but are working for wages, since it is harder to believe that
employers will pay wages exceeding marginal productivity. The most important of
these sectors is domestic service, which is usually even more inflated in
over-populated countries than is petty trading (in Barbados 16 per cent. of the
population is in domestic service). The reason is that in over-populated countries
the code of ethical behaviour so shapes itself that it becomes good ;form for each
person to offer as much employment as he can. -The line between employees and
dependents is very thinly drawn. Social prestige requires people to have servants;
and the grad seigneur may have to keep a whole army of retainers who are really
little more than a burden upon his purse. This is found not only in domestic
service, but in every sector of employment. Most businesses in, under-developed
countries employ a large number of “messengers,” whose contribution is almost
negligible ; you see them sitting outside office doors, or hanging around in the
courtyard. And even in the severest slump the agricultural or commercial employer
is expected to keep his labour force somehow or other-it would be immoral to turn
them out, for how would they eat, in countries where the only form of
unemployment assistance is the charity of relatives ? So it comes about that even

2

W.A.Lewis on Development with Unlimited Supplies of Labor
in the sectors where people are working for wages, and above all the domestic
sector, marginal productivity may be negligible or even zero.
Whether marginal productivity is zero or negligible is not, however, of fundamental
importance to our analysis. The price of labour, in these economies, is a wage at the
subsistence level (we define this later). The supply of labour is therefore
“unlimited” so long as the supply of labour at this price exceeds the demand. In this
situation, new industries can be created, or old industries expanded without, limit at
the existing wage ; or, to put it more exactly, shortage of labour is no limit to the
creation of new sources of employment. If we cease to ask whether the marginal
productivity of labour is negligible and ask instead only the question from what
sectors would additional labour be available if new industries were created offering
employment at subsistence wages, the answer becomes even more comprehensive.
For we have then not only the farmers, the casuals, the petty traders and the
retainers (domestic and commercial), but we have also three other classes from
which to choose.
First of all, there are the wives and daughters of the household. The employment of
women outside the household depends upon a great number of factors, religious
and conventional, and is certainly not exclusively a matter of employment
opportunities. There are, however, a number of countries where the current limit is
for practical purposes only employment opportunities. This is true, for example,
even inside the United Kingdom. The proportion of women gainfully employed in
the U.K. varies enormously from one region to another according to employment
opportunities for women. For example, in 1939 whereas there were 52 women
gainfully employed for every 100 men in Lancashire, there were only 15 women
gainfully employed for every 100 men in South Wales. Similarly in the Gold Coast,
although there is an acute shortage of male labour, any industry which offered good
employment to women would be besieged with applications. The transfer of
women’s work from the household to commercial employment is one of the most
notable features of economic development. It is not by any means all gain, but the
gain is substantial because most of the things which women otherwise do in the
household can in fact be done much better or more, cheaply outside, thanks to the
large scale economies of specialisation, and also to the use of capital (grinding
grain, fetching water from the river, making cloth, making clothes, cooking the
midday meal, teaching children, nursing the sick, etc.). One of the surest ways of
increasing the national income is therefore to create new sources of employment for
women outside the home.
The second source of labour for expanding industries is the increase in the
population resulting from the excess of births Dover deaths. This source is
important in any dynamic analysis of how capital accumulation can occur, and
employment can increase, without any increase in real wages. It was therefore a
cornerstone of Ricardo’s system. Strictly speaking, population increase is not
relevant either to the classical analysis, or to the analysis which follows in this
article, unless it can be shown that the increase of population is caused by economic
development and would not otherwise be so large. The proof of this proposition
was supplied to the classical economists by the Malthusian law of ,population.
There is already an enormous literature of the genus : “What Malthus Really
Meant,” into which we need not enter. Modern population theory has advanced a
little by analysing separately the effects of economic development upon the birth
rate, and its effects on the death rate. Of the former, we know little. There is no
evidence that the birth rate ever rises with economic development. In Western
Europe it has fallen during the last eighty years. We are not quite sure why ; we
suspect that it was for reasons associated with development, and we hope that the
same thing may happen in the rest of the world as development spreads. Of the

3

W.A.Lewis on Development with Unlimited Supplies of Labor
death rate we are more certain. It comes down with development from around 40 to
around 12 per thousand ; in the first stage because better communications and trade
eliminate death from local famines ; in the second stage because better public
health facilities banish the great epidemic diseases of plague, smallpox, cholera,
malaria, yellow fever (and eventually tuberculosis) ; and in the third stage because
widespread facilities for treating the sick snatch from the jaws of death many who
would otherwise perish in infancy or in their prime. Because the effect of
development on the death rate is so swift and certain, while its effect on the birth
rate is unsure and retarded, we can say for certain that the, immediate effect of
economic development is to cause the population to grow; after some decades it
begins to grow (we hope) less rapidly. Hence in any society where the death rate is
around 40 per thousand, the effect of economic development will be to generate an
increase in the supply of labour.
Marx offered a third source of labour to add to the reserve army, namely the
unemployment generated by increasing efficiency. Ricardo had admitted that the
creation of machinery could reduce employment. Marx seized upon the argument,
and in effect generalised it, for into the pit of unemployment he threw not only
those displaced by machinery, but also the self-employed and petty capitalists who
could not compete with larger capitalists of increasing size, enjoying the benefits of
the economies of scale. Nowadays we reject this argument on empirical grounds. It
is clear that the effect of capital accumulation in the past has been to reduce the size
of the reserve army, and not to increase it, so we have lost interest in arguments
about what is “theoretically” possible.
When we take account of all the sources we have now listed-the farmers, the
casuals, the petty traders, the retainers (domestic and commercial), women in the
household, and population growth-it is clear enough that there can be in an
over-populated economy an enormous expansion of new industries or new
employment opportunities without any shortage of unskilled labour becoming
apparent in the labour market. From the point of view of the effect of economic
development on wages, the supply of labour is practically unlimited.
This applies only to unskilled labour. There may at any time be a shortage of skilled
workers of any grade-ranging from masons, electricians or welders to engineers,
biologists or administrators. Skilled labour may be the bottleneck in expansion, just
like capital or land. Skilled labour, however, is only what Marshall might have
called a “quasi-bottleneck,”if he had not had so nice a sense of elegant language.
For it is only a very temporary bottleneck, in the sense that if the capital is available
for development, the capitalists or their government will soon provide the facilities
for training more skilled people. The real bottlenecks to expansion are therefore
capital and natural resources, and we can proceed on the assumption that so long as
these are available the necessary skills will be provided as well, though perhaps
with some time lag.
3. If unlimited labour is available, while capital is scarce, we know from the Law of
Variable Proportions that the capital should not be spread thinly over all the labour.
Only so much labour should be used with capital as will reduce the marginal
productivity of labour to zero. In practice, however, labour is not available at a zero
wage. Capital will therefore be applied only up to the point where the marginal
productivity of labour equals the current wage. This is illustrated in Figure I. The
horizontal axis measures the quantity of labour, and the vertical axis its marginal
product. There is a fixed amount of capital. OW is the current wage. If the marginal
product of labour were zero outside the capitalist sector, OR ought to be employed.
But it will pay to to employ only OM in the capitalist sector. WNP is the capitalists’
surplus. OWPM goes in wages to workers in the capitalist sector, while workers

4

W.A.Lewis on Development with Unlimited Supplies of Labor
outside this sector (i.e. beyond M) earn what they can in the subsistence sector of
the economy.

The analysis requires further elaboration. In the first place, after what we have said
earlier on about some employers in these economies keeping retainers, it may seem
strange to be arguing now that labour will be employed up to the point where the
wage equals the marginal productivity. Nevertheless, this is probably the right
assumption to make when we are set upon analysing the expansion of the capitalist
sector of the economy. For the type of capitalist who brings about economic
expansion is not the same as the type of employer who treats his employees like
retainers. He is more commercially minded, and more conscious of efficiency, cost
and profitability. Hence, if our interest is in an expanding capitalist sector, the
assumption of profit maximisation is probably a fair approximation to the truth.
Next, we note the use of the terms “capitalist” sector and “subsistence” sector The
capitalist sector is that part of the economy which uses reproducible capital, and
pays capitalists for the use thereof. (This coincides with Smith’s definition of the
productive workers, who are those who work with capital and whose product can
therefore be sold at a price above their wages). We can think, if we like, of
capitalists hiring out their capital to peasants ; in which case, there being by
definition an unlimited number of peasants, only some will get capital, and these
will have to pay for its use a price which leaves them only subsistence earnings.
More usually, however, the use of capital is controlled by capitalists, who hire the
services of labour. The classical analysis was therefore. conducted on the
assumption that capital was used for hiring people. It does not make any difference
to the argument, and for convenience we will follow this usage. The subsistence
sector is by difference all that part of the economy which is not using reproducible
capital. Output per head is lower in this sector than in the capitalist sector, because
it is not fructified by capital (this is why it was called “unproductive” ; the
distinction between productive and unproductive had nothing to do with whether
the work yielded utility, as some neo-classicists have scornfully but erroneously
asserted). As more capital becomes available more workers can be draw into the
capitalist from the subsistence sector, and their output per head rises as they move
from the one sector to the other.
Thirdly we take account of the fact that the capitalist sector, like the subsistence
sector, can also be subdivided. What we have is not one island of expanding
capitalist employment, surrounded by a vast sea of subsistence workers, but rather a
number of such tiny islands. This is very typical of countries in their early stages of
development. We find a few industries highly capitalised, such as mining or electric
power, side by side with the most primitive techniques; a few high class shops,
surrounded by masses of old style traders ; a few highly capitalised plantations,
surrounded by a sea of peasants. But we find the same contrasts also outside their
economic life. There are one or two modern towns, with the finest architecture,
water supplies, communications and the like, into which people drift from other

5

W.A.Lewis on Development with Unlimited Supplies of Labor
tows and villages which might almost belong to another planet. There is the same
contrast even between people ; between the few highly westernised, trousered,
natives, educated in western universities, speaking western languages, and glorying
in Beethoven, Mill, Marx or Einstein, and the great mass of their countrymen who
live in quite other worlds Capital and new ideas are not thinly diffused throughout
the economy; they are highly concentrated at a number of points, from which they
spread outwards.
Though the capitalised sector can be subdivided into islands, it remains a single
sector because of the effect of competition in tending to equalise the earnings on
capital. The competitive principle does not demand that the same amount of capital
per person be employed on each “island,” or that average profit per unit of capital
be the same, but only that the marginal profit be the same. Thus, even if marginal
profits were the same all round, islands which yield diminishing returns may be
more profitable than others, the earliest capitalists having cornered the vantage
points. But in any case marginal. profits are not the same all round. In backward
economies knowledge is one of the scarcest goods. Capitalists have experience of
certain types of investment, say of trading or plantation agriculture, and, not of
other types, say of manufacturing, and they stick to what they know. So the
economy is frequently lopsided in the sense that there is excessive investment in
some parts and under-investment in others. Also, financial institutions are more
highly developed for some purposes than for others-capital can be got cheaply for
trade, but not for house building or for peasant agriculture, for instance. Even in a
very highly developed economy the tendency for capital to flow evenly through the
economy is very weak ; in a backward economy it hardly exists. Inevitably what
one gets are very heavily developed patches of the economy, surrounded by
economic darkness.
Next we must say something about the wage level. The wage which the expanding
capitalist sector has to, pay is determined by what people can earn outside that
sector. The classical economists used to think of the wage as being determined by
what is required for subsistence consumption, and this may be the right solution in
some cases. However, in economies where the majority of the people are peasant
farmers, working on their own land, we have a more objective index, for the
minimum at which labour can be had is now set by the average product of the
farmer; men will not leave the family farm to seek employment if the wage is worth
less than they would be able to consume if they remained at home. This objective
standard, alas, disappears again if the farmers have to pay rent, for their net
earnings will then depend upon the amount of rent they have to pay, and in
overpopulated countries the rent will probably be adjusted so as to leave them just
enough for a conventional level of subsistence. It is not, however, of great
importance to the argument whether earnings in the subsistence sector are
determined objectively by the level of peasant productivity, or subjectively in terms
of a conventional standard of living. Whatever the mechanism, the result is an
unlimited supply of labour for which this is the minimum level of earnings.
The fact that the wage level in the capitalist sector depends upon earnings in the
subsistence sector is sometimes of immense political importance, since its effect is
that capitalists have a direct interest in holding down the productivity of the
subsistence workers. Thus, the owners of plantations have no interest in seeing
knowledge of new techniques or new seeds conveyed to the peasants, and if they
are influential in the government, they will not be found using their influence to
expand the facilities for agricultural extension. They will not support proposals for
land settlement, and are often instead to be found engaged in turning the peasants
off their lands. (Cf. Marx on “Primary Accumulation”). This is one of the worst
features of imperialism, for instance. The imperialists invest capital and hire

6

W.A.Lewis on Development with Unlimited Supplies of Labor
workers; it is to their advantage to keep wages low, and even in those cases where
they do not actually go out of their way to impoverish the subsistence economy,
they will at least very seldom be found doing anything to make it more productive.
In actual fact the record of every imperial power in Africa in modern times is one of
impoverishing the subsistence economy, either by taking away the people’s land, or
by demanding forced labour in the capitalist sector, or by imposing taxes to drive
people to work for capitalist employers. Compared with what they have spent on
providing facilities for European agriculture or mining, their expenditure on the
improvement of African agriculture has been negligible. The failure of imperialism
to raise living standards is not wholly to be attributed to self interest, but there are
many places where it can be traced directly to the effects of having imperial capital
invested in agriculture or in mining.
Earnings in the subsistence sector set a floor to wages in the capitalist sector, but in
practice wages have to be higher than this, and there is usually a gap of 30 per cent.
or more between capitalist wages and subsistence earnings. This gap may be
explained in several ways. Part of the difference is illusory, because of the higher
cost of living in the capitalist sector. This may be due to the capitalist sector being
concentrated in congested towns, so that rents and transport costs are higher. All the
same, there is also usually a substantial difference in real wages. This may be
required because of the psychological cost of transferring from the easy going way
of life of the subsistence sector to the more regimented and urbanised environment
of the capitalist sector. Or it may be a recognition of the fact that even the unskilled
worker is of more use to the capitalist sector after he has been there for some time
than is the raw recruit from the country. Or it may itself represent a difference in
conventional standards, workers in the capitalist sector acquiring tastes and a social
prestige which have conventionally to be recognised by higher real wages. That this
last may be the explanation is suggested by cases where the capitalist workers
organise themselves into trade unions and strive to protect or increase their
differential. But the differential exists even where there are no unions.
The effect of this gap is shown diagrammatically in Figure II, which is drawn on
the same basis as Figure I. OS now represents subsistence earnings, and OW the
capitalist wage (real not money). To borrow an analogy from the sea, the frontier of
competition between capitalist and subsistence labour, now appears not as a beach
but as a cliff.
This phenomenon of a gap between the earnings of competing suppliers is found
even in the most advanced economies. Much of the difference between the earnings
of different classes of the population (grades of skill, of education, of responsibility
or of prestige) can be described only in these terms. Neither is the phenomenon
confined to labour. We know of course that two firms in a competitive market need
not have the same average profits if one has some
superiority to the other; we reflect this difference in rents, and ask only that
marginal rates of profit should be the same. We know also that marginal rates

7

W.A.Lewis on Development with Unlimited Supplies of Labor

will not be the same if ignorance prevails-this point we have mentioned earlier.
What is often puzzling in a competitive industry is to find a difference in marginal
profits, or marginal costs, without ignorance, and yet without the more efficient
firm driving its rivals out of business. ‘ It is as if the more efficient says : “I could
compete with you, but I won’t,” which is also what subsistence labour says when it
does not transfer to capitalist employment unless real wages are substantially
higher. The more efficient firm, instead of competing wherever its real costs are
marginally less than its rivals, establishes for itself superior standards of
remuneration. It pays its workers more and lavishes welfare services, scholarships
and pensions upon them. It demands a higher rate on its marginal investments ;
where its competitors would be satisfied with 10%, it demands 20%, to keep up its
average record. It goes in for prestige expenditure, contributing to hospitals,
universities, flood relief and such. Its highest executives spend their time sitting on
public committees, and have to have deputies to do their work. When all this is
taken into account it is not at all surprising to find a competitive equilibrium in
which high cost firms survive easily side by side with firms of much greater
efficiency.
4. So far we have merely been setting the stage. Now the play begins. For we can
now begin to trace the process of economic expansion.
The key to the process is the use which is make of the capitalist surplus In so far as
this is reinvested in creating new capital, the capitalist sector expands, taking more
people into capitalist employment out of the subsistence sector.. The surplus is then
larger still, capital formation is still greater, and so the process continues until the
labour surplus disappears.
OS is as before average subsistence earnings, and OW the capitalist wage. WN1Q1
represents .. the surplus in the initial’ stage. .”, Since some of this is reinvested, the
amount of fixed capital increases. Hence the schedule of the marginal productivity
of labour is now raised throughout, to the level of N2Q2. Both the surplus and
capitalist employment are now larger. Further reinvestment raises the schedule of
the marginal productivity of labour to N3Q3. And the process continues so long as
there is surplus labour.

Various comments are needed in elaboration. First, as to the relationship between
capital, technical progress, and productivity. In theory it should be possible to

8

W.A.Lewis on Development with Unlimited Supplies of Labor
distinguish between the growth of capital and the growth of technical knowledge,
but in practice it is neither possible nor necessary for this analysis. As a matter of
statistical analysis, differentiating the effects of capital and of knowledge in any
industry is straightforward if the product is homogeneous through time, if the
physical inputs are also unchanged (in kind) and if the relative prices of the inputs
have remained constant. But when we try to do it for any industry in practice we
usually find that the product has changed, the inputs have changed and relative
prices have changed, so that we get any number of indices of technical progress
from the same data, according to the assumptions and the type of index number
which we use. In any case, for the purpose of this analysis it is unnecessary to
‘distinguish between capital formation and the growth of knowledge within the
capitalist sector. Growth of technical knowledge outside the capitalist sector would
be fundamentally important, since it would raise the level of wages, and so reduce
the capitalist surplus. But inside the capitalist sector knowledge and capital work in
the same direction, to raise the surplus and to increase employment. They also work
together. The application of new technical knowledge usually requires new
investment, and whether the new knowledge is capital-saving (and thus equivalent
to an increase in capital) or labour-saving (and thus equivalent to /an increase in the
marginal productivity of labour) makes no difference to our diagram. Capital and
technical knowledge also work together in the sense that in economies where
techniques are stagnant savings are not so readily applied to increasing productive
capital ; in such economies it is more usual to use savings for building pyramids,
churches, and other such durable consumer goods. Accordingly, in this analysis the
growth of productive capital and the growth of technical knowledge are treated as a
single phenomenon (just as we earlier decided that we could treat the growth of the
supply of skilled labour and the growth of capital as a single phenomenon in long
run analysis).
Next we must consider more closely the capitalist surplus. Malthus wanted to know
what the capitalists would do with this ever-growing surplus; surely this would be
an embarrassing glut of commodities? Ricardo replied that there would be no glut;
what the capitalists did not consume themselves, they would use for paying the
wages of workers to create more fixed capital (this is a free interpretation, since the
classical economists associated the expansion of employment with an increase of
circulating rather than of fixed capital). This new fixed capital would then in the
next stage make possible the employment of more people in the capitalist sector.
Malthus persisted; why should the capitalists produce more capital to produce a
larger surplus which could only be used for producing still more capital and so ad
infinitum? To this Marx supplied one answer: capitalists have a passion for
accumulating capital. Ricardo supplied another: if they don’t want to accumulate,
they will consume instead of saving; provided there is no propensity to hoard, there
will be no glut. Employment in the next stage will not be as big as it would have
been if they had created more fixed capital and so brought more workers into the
capitalist sector, but so long as there is no hoarding it makes no difference to the
current level of employment whether capitalists decide to consume or to save.
Malthus then raised another question; suppose that the capitalists do save and invest
without hoarding, surely the fact that capital is growing more rapidly than
consumption must so lower the rate of profit on capital that there comes a point
when they decide that it is not worth while to invest? This, Ricardo replied, is
impossible; since the supply of labour is unlimited, you can always find
employment for any amount of capital. This is absolutely correct, for his model; in
the neo-classical model capital grows faster than labour, and so one has to ask
whether the rate of profit will not fall, but in the classical model the unlimited
supply of labour means that the capital/labour ratio, and therefore the rate of
surplus, can be held constant for any quantity of capital (i.e., unlimited “widening”
is possible). The only fly in the ointment is that there may develop a shortage of

9

W.A.Lewis on Development with Unlimited Supplies of Labor
natural resources, so that though the capitalists get any amount of labour at a
constant wage, they have to pay ever rising rents to landlords. This was what
worried Ricardo; it was important to him to distinguish that part of the surplus
which goes to landlords from that part which goes to capitalists, since he believed
that economic development inevitably increases the relative scarcity of land. We
are not. so certain of this as he was. Certainly development increases the rent of
urban sites fantastically, but its effect on rural rents depends on the rate of technical
progress in agriculture, which Malthus and Ricardo both gravely under-estimated.
If we assume technical progress in agriculture, no hoarding, and unlimited labour at
a constant wage, the rate of profit on capital cannot fall. On the contrary it must
increase, since all ‘the benefit of technical progress in the capitalist sector accrues
to the capitalists.
Marx’s interest in the surplus was ethical as well as scientific. He regarded it as
robbery of the workers. His descendants are less certain of this. The surplus, after
all, is only partly consumed; the other part is used for capital formation. As for the
part which is consumed, some of it is a genuine payment for service rendered-for
managerial or entrepreneurial services, as well as for the services of public
administrators, whether these are paid salaries out of taxes, or whether they live off
their rents or rentes while performing unpaid public duties as magistrates,
lord-lieutenants, or the like. - Even in the U.S.S.R. all these functionaries are paid
out of the surplus, and handsomely paid too. It is arguable that these services are
over-paid ; this is why we have pro gressive taxation, and it is also one of the more
dubious arguments for nationalisation (more dubious because the functionaries of
public corporations have to be paid the market rate if the economy is only partially
nationalised). But it is not arguable that all this part of the surplus (i.e. the part
consumed) morally belongs to the workers, in any sense. As for the part which is
used for capital formation, the experience of the U.S.S.R. is that this is increased,
and not reduced, by transforming the ownership of capital. Expropriation deprives
the capitalists of control over this part of the surplus, and of the right to consume
this part at some later date, but it does nothing whatever to transfer this part of the
surplus to the workers. Marx’s emotional approach was a natural reaction to the
classical writers, who sometimes in unguarded moments wrote as if the capitalist
surplus and its increase were all that counted in the national income (c.f. Ricardo,
who called it “the net revenue” of production). All this, however, is by the way; or
our present interest is not in ethical questions, but in how the model works.
5. The central problem in the theory of economic development is to understand the
process by which a community hich was previously saving and investing 4 or 5 per
cent of is national income or less, converts itself into an economy here voluntary
saving is running at about 12 to 15 per cent. of national income or more. This is the
central problem because the central fact of economic development is rapid capital
accumulation. (including knowledge and skills with’ capital”). We cannot explain
any “industrial” revolution (as the economic historians pretend to do) until we can
explain why saving increased relatively to national income.
It is possible that the explanation is simply that some psychological change occurs
which causes people to be more thrifty. This, however is not a plausible
explanation. We are interested not in the people in general, but only say in the 10
per cent. of them with the largest incomes, who in countries with surplus labour
receive up to 40 per cent. of the national income (nearer 30 per cent. in more
developed countries). The remaining 90 per cent. of the* people never manage to
save a significant fraction of their incomes. The important question is why does the
top 10 per cent. save more ? The reason may be because they decide to consume
less, but this reason does not square with the facts. There is no evidence of a fall in
personal consumption by the top 10 per cent. at a time when industrial revolutions

10

W.A.Lewis on Development with Unlimited Supplies of Labor
are occurring. It is also possible that, though they do not save any more, the top 10
per cent. spend less of their income on durable consumer goods (tombs, country
houses, temples) and more on productive capital. Certainly, if one compares
different civilisations this is a striking difference in the disposition of income.
Civilisations in which there is a rapid growth of technical knowledge or expansion
of other opportunities present more profitable outlets for investment than do
technologically stagnant civilisations, and tempt capital into productive channels
rather than into the building of monuments. But if one takes a country only over the
course of the hundred years during which it undergoes a revolution in the rate of
capital formation, there is no noticeable change in this regard. Certainly, judging by
the novels, the top 10 per cent. in England were not spending noticeably less on
durable consumer goods in 1800 than they were in 1700.
Much the most plausible explanation is that people save more because they have
more to save. This is not to say merely that the national income per head is larger,
since there is no clear evidence that the proportion of the national income saved
increases with national income per head-at any rate our fragmentary evidence for
the United Kingdom and for the United States suggests that this is not so. The
explanation is much more likely to be that saving increases relatively to the national
income because the incomes of the savers increase relatively to the national
income. The central fact of economic development is that the distribution of
incomes is altered in favour of the saving class.
Practically all saving is done by people who receive profits for rents. Workers’
savings are very small. The middle-classes save a little, but in practically every
community the savings of the middle-classes out of their salaries are of little
consequence for productive investment. Most members of the middle-class are
engaged in the perpetual struggle to keep up with the Jones’s; if they manage to
save enough to buy the house in which they live, they are doing well. They may
save to educate their children, or to subsist in their old age, but this saving is
virtually offset by the savings being used up for the same purposes. Insurance is the
middle-class’s favourite form of saving in modern societies, yet in the U.K., where
the habit is extremely well developed, the annual net increase in insurance funds
from all classes, rich, middle, and poor is less than 1.5 per cent. of the national
income. It is doubtful if the wage and salary classes ever anywhere save as much as
3 per cent. of the national income, net (possible exception : Japan). If we are
interested in savings, we must concentrate attention upon profits and rents.
For our purpose it does not matter whether profits are distributed or undistributed ;
the major source of savings is profits, and if we find that savings are increasing as a
proportion of the national income, we may take it for granted that this is because
the share of profits in the national income is increasing. (As a refinement, for highly
taxed communities, we should say profits net of taxes upon profits, whether
personal income or corporate taxes). Our problem then becomes what are the
circumstances in which the share of profits in the national income increases ?
The modified classical model which we axe using here has the virtue of answering
the question. In the beginning, the national income consists almost entirely of
subsistence income. Abstracting from population growth and assuming that the
marginal product of labour is zero, this subsistence income remains constant
throughout the expansion, since by definition labour can be yielded up to the
expanding capitalist sector without reducing subsistence output. The process
therefore increases the capitalist surplus and the income of capitalist employees,
taken together, as a proportion of the national income. It is possible to imagine
conditions in which the surplus nevertheless does not increase relatively to national
income. This requires that capitalist employment should expand relatively much

11

W.A.Lewis on Development with Unlimited Supplies of Labor
faster than the surplus, so that within the capitalist sector gross margins or profit
plus rent are falling sharply relatively to wages. We know that this does not happen.
Even if gross margins were constant, profits in our model would be increasing
relatively to national income. But gross margins are not likely to be constant in our
model, which assumes that practically the whole benefit of capital accumulation
and of technical progress goes into the surplus ; because real wages are constant, all
that the workers get out of the expansion is that more of them are employed at a
wage above the subsistence earnings. The model says, in effect , that if unlimited
supplies of labour are available at a constant real wage, and if any part of profits is
reinvested in productive capacity, profits will grow continuously relatively to the
national income, and capital formation will also grow relatively to the national
income.
The model also covers the case of a technical revolution. Some historians have
suggested that the capital for the British Industrial Revolution came out of profits
made possible by a spate of inventions occurring together. This is extremely hard to
fit into the neo-classical model, since it involves the assumption that these
inventions raised the marginal productivity of capital more than they raised the
marginal productivity of labour, a proposition which it is hard to establish in any
economy where labour is scarce. (If we do not make this assumption, other incomes
rise just as fast as profits, and investment does not increase relatively to national
income). On the other hand the suggestion fits beautifully into the modified
classical model, since in this model practically the whole benefit of inventions goes
into the surplus, and becomes available for further capital accumulation.
This model also helps us to face squarely the nature of the economic problem of
backward countries. If we ask “why do they save so little, the truthful answer is not
“because they are so poor,” as we might be tempted to conclude from the pathbreaking and praiseworthy correlations of Mr. Colin Clark. The truthful answer is
“because their capitalist sector is so small” (remembering that “capitalist” here does
not mean private capitalist, but would apply equally to state capitalist). If they had a
larger capitalist sector, profits would be a greater part of their national income, and
saving and investment would also be relatively larger. (The state capitalist can
accumulate capital even faster than the private capitalist, since he can use for the
purpose not only the profits of the capitalist sector, but also what he can force or tax
out of the subsistence sector).
Another point which we must note is that though the increase of the capitalist sector
involves an increase in the inequality of incomes, as between capitalists and the
rest, mere inequality of income is not enough to ensure a high level of saving. In
point of fact the inequality of income is greater in over-populated under-developed
countries than it is in advanced industrial nations, for the simple reason that
agricultural rents are so high in the former. Eighteenth century British economists
took it for granted that the landlord class is given to prodigal consumption rather
than to productive investment, and this is certainly true of landlords in
underdeveloped countries. Hence, given two countries of equal incomes, in which
distribution is more unequal in one than in the other, savings may be greater where
distribution is more equal if profits are higher relatively to rents. It is the inequality
which goes with profits that favours capital formation, and not the inequality which
goes with rents. Correspondingly, it is very hard to argue that these countries
cannot afford to save more, when 40 per cent. or so of the national income is going
to the top 10 per cent., and so much of rent incomes is squandered.
Behind this analysis also lies the sociological problem of the emergence of a
capitalist class, that is to say of a group of men who think in terms of investing
capital productively. The dominant classes in backward economies-landlords,

12

W.A.Lewis on Development with Unlimited Supplies of Labor
traders moneylenders, priests, soldiers, princes-do not normally think in these
terms. What causes a society to grow a capitalist class is a very difficult question, to
which probably, there is no general answer. Most countries seem to begin by
importing their capitalists from abroad; and in these days many (e.g. U.S.S.R.,
India) are growing a class’ of state capitalists who, for political reasons of one sort
or another, are determined to create capital rapidly on public account. As for
indigenous private capitalists, their emergence is probably bound up with the
emergence of new opportunities, especially something that widens the market,
associated with some new technique which greatly increases the productivity of
labour if labour and capital are used together. Once a capitalist sector has emerged,
it is only a matter of time before it becomes sizeable. If very little technical
progress is occurring, the surplus will grow only slowly. But if for one reason or
another the opportunities for using capital productivity increase rapidly, the surplus
will also grow rapidly, and the capitalist class with it.
6. In our model so far capital is created only out of profits earned. In the real world,
however, capitalists also create capital as a result of a net increase in the supply of
money --especially bank credit. We have now also to take account of this.
In the neo-classical model capital can be created only by withdrawing resources
from producing consumer goods. In our model, however, there is surplus labour,
and if (as we shall assume) its marginal productivity is zero, and if, also, capital can
be created by labour without withdrawing scarce land and capital from other uses,
then capital can be created without reducing the output of consumer goods. This
second proviso is important, since if we need capital or land to make capital the
results in our model are the same as the results in the neo-classical model, despite
the fact that there is surplus labour. However, in practice the proviso is often
fulfilled. Food cannot be grown without land, but roads, viaducts, irrigation
channels and buildings can be created by human labour with hardly any capital to
speak of-witness the Pyramids, or the marvellous railway tunnels built in the mid-nineteenth century almost with bare hands. Even in modern industrial countries
constructional activity, which lends itself to hand labour, is as much as 50 or 60 per
cent. of gross fixed investment, so it is not difficult to think of labour creating
capital without using any but the simplest tools. The classical economists were not
wrong in thinking of lack of circulating capital as being a more serious obstacle to
expansion in their world than lack of fixed capital. In the analysis which follows in
this section we assume that surplus labour cannot be used to make consumer goods
without using up more land or capital, but can be used to make capital goods
without using any scarce factors.
If a community is short of capital, and has idle resources which can be set to
creating capital, it seems very desirable on the face of the matter that this should be
done, even if it means creating extra money to finance the extra employment. There
is no loss of other output while the new capital is being made, and when it comes
into use it will raise output and employment in just the same way as would capital
financed not by credit creation but out of profits. The difference between
profit-financed and credit-financed capital is not in the ultimate effects on output,
but in’the immediate effects on prices and on the distribution of income.
Before we come to the effects on prices, however, we should pause a moment to
notice what happens to the output of consumer goods in this model and the others
while credit-financed capital is being created, but before it begins to be used. In the
neo-classical model an increase in capital formation has to be accompanied by a
corresponding fall in the output of consumer goods, since scarce resources can do
one or the other. In the Keynesian model an increase in capital formation also
increases the output of consumer goods, and if the multiplier exceeds 2, the output

13

W.A.Lewis on Development with Unlimited Supplies of Labor
of consumer goods increases even more than capital formation. In our model capital
formation goes up, but the output of consumer goods is not immediately affected.
This is one of those crucial cases where it is important to be certain that one is
using the right model when it comes to giving advice on economic policy.
In our model, if surplus labour is put to capital formation and paid out of new
money, prices rise, because the stream of money purchases is swollen while the
output of consumer goods is for the time being constant. What is happening is that
the fixed amount of consumer goods is being redistributed, towards the workers
newly employed, away from the rest of the community (this is where the lack of
circulating capital comes into the picture). This process is not “forced saving” in the
useful sense of that term. In the neo-classical model the output of consumer goods
is reduced, forcing the community as a whole to save. In our model, however,
consumer goods output is not at any time reduced ; there is a forced redistribution
of consumption, but not forced saving. And, of course, as soon as the capital goods
begin to yield output, consumption begins to rise.
This inflationary process does not go on forever; it comes to an end when voluntary
savings increase to a level where they are equal to the inflated level of investment.
Since savings are a function of profits, this means that the inflation continues until
profits increase so much relatively to the national income that capitalists can now
finance the higher rate of investment out of their profits without any further
recourse to monetary expansion. Essentially equilibrium is secured by raising the
ratio of profits to the national income. The equilibrator need not however be profits
; it might equally be government receipts, if there is a structure of taxes such that
the ratio of government receipts to the national income rises automatically as the
national income rises. This seems to be just about what happened in the U.S.S.R. In
the crucial years when the economy was being transformed from a 5 per cent. to a
(probably) 20 per cent. net saver, there was a tremendous inflation of prices
(apparently prices rose about 700 per cent. in a decade), but the inflationary profits
largely went to the government in the form of turnover tax, and by the end of the
decade a new equilibrium was in sight.
It is not, however, always a simple matter to raise profits relatively to national
income simply by turning on the monetary tap. The simplest and most extreme
model of an inflation would be to assume that when the capitalists finance capital
formation by creating credit, the money all comes back to them in the very next
round in the form of an increase in their profits. In such a model profits, voluntary
savings and capital formation can be raised to any desired level in a very short time,
with only a small increase in prices. Something like this may well apply in the
U.S.S.R. In real terms, however, this implies that there has been a fall in the share
of the national income received by other people, including a fall in their real
consumption, since they have had to release consumer goods for the previously
unemployed who are now engaged in capital formation. It may be the farmers who
are worse off, this showing itself in the prices of manufactures rising relatively to
farm prices .... Or it may be the workers in the capitalist sector who are worse off,
because farm prices and the prices of manufactures rise faster than their wages. Or
the blow may be falling upon salaried workers, pensioners, landlords or creditors.
Now in the real world none of these classes will take this lying down. In the
U.S.S.R., where the intention was that the capital formation should be at the
expense of the farmers, it led in the end to organised violence on both sides. In our
model it is hard to get away with it at the expense of the workers, since the wage in
the capitalist sector must stand at a certain minimum level above subsistence
earnings if labour is to be available. Generally, what happens as prices rise is that
new contracts have to be made to take account of rising price levels. Some classes
get caught, but only temporarily.

14

W.A.Lewis on Development with Unlimited Supplies of Labor
Now, if one pursued this argument logically, it would lead to the conclusion that
equilibrium could never be reachedat any rate, so long as the banking system is
content to supply all “legitimate” demands for money. If hone of the other classes
can be soaked, it- seems impossible for profits to rise relatively to the national
income for more than a temporary space, and it ‘therefore seems impossible to
reach an equilibrium level of savings equal to the new level of investment. The
inflation, once begun goes on forever. This, however, is not possible for another
reason, namely the fact that the real national income is not fixed, but rising, as a
result of the capital formation. Therefore all that is required is that capitalists’ real
incomes rise faster than other people’s. Beyond the first year or two, when the
additional consumer goods begin to appear, it is not necessary for any class to
reduce its consumption. By the time the process of recontracting has begun; output
has also begun to rise, and it is therefore possible to reach a modus vivendi.
We can give an exact description of this equilibrium in our modified classical
model. In this model the average subsistence real income is given, and so also
therefore is the real wage in the capitalist sector. It is not possible, by inflation or
otherwise, to reach a new equilibrium in which the capitalist surplus has increased
at the expense of either of these. If, therefore, the capitalists begin to finance capital
formation out of credit, they lower the real incomes of the others only temporarily.
Wages would then be chasing prices continuously but for the fact that, since output
is growing all the time, profits are growing all the time. Hence the part of the
investment which is financed out of credit is diminishing all the time, until
equilibrium is reached. For example, suppose that an investment of £100 a year
yields £20 a year profit, of which £10 a year is saved. Then, if capitalists invest an
extra £100 a year, all of which in the first year is financed out of credit, by the
eleventh year profits will be £200 a year greater, savings will be £100 a year greater
and there will be no further monetary pressure on prices. All that will remain from
the episode is that there will be £1,000 more useful productive capital at work than
there would have if the credit creation had not taken place.
Thus we have two simple models marking the extreme cases. In the first, all the
credit created comes back to the capitalists at once as profits for to the state
capitalist as taxes). Equilibrium is then reached easily, with the capitalists gaining
at the expense of all others. In the other model the capitalists can only gain
temporarily; equilibrium then takes much longer to reach, but it is reached
eventually. In the first case we need only an expansion of money income ; but in
the second case it is the expansion of real income which eventually brings the
capitalists the required proportion of the national income.
The fact that capital formation increases real output must also be borne in mind in
the analysis of the effects of credit creation upon prices. The inflations which loom
most in our minds are those which occur in war-time, wheu resources are being
withdrawn from producing consumer goods. If the supply of money is increasing
while the output of goods is falling, anything can happen to prices. Inflation for the
purpose of capital formation, however, is a very different kettle of fish. For it
results in increasing consumer goods output, and this results in falling prices if the
quantity of money is held constant.
Perhaps it may be as well to illustrate a simple case. Suppose that £100 is invested
every year, in the first instance by creating credit, and that each investment yields
£30 a year in its second year and after. Suppose that it costs nothing to reap the
yield ; the price of £30 charged for the product being pure rent derived from its
scarcity (investment in an irrigation works is a nearly perfect illustration). Then, if
we use the Keynesian formula for a demand inflation, and assume the multiplier to

15

W.A.Lewis on Development with Unlimited Supplies of Labor
be 2, money income will rise to an equilibrium level of + £200 a year. Output,
however, will begin to increase by + £30 a year from the second year onward. By
the eighth year output will have increased by + £210, while money income will
have increased only by slightly less than + £200. Thereafter prices will be below
the initial level, and will fall continuously. The alleged precision of this analysis is
of course subject to all the usual objections against applying multiplier analysis to
inflationary conditions, namely the instability of the propensity to consume, the
effect of secondary investment, and the dangers of cost inflation. But though the
precision is spurious, the result is nevertheless real. Inflation for purposes of capital
formation is self-destructive. Prices begin to rise, but are sooner or later overtaken
by rising output, and may, in the last state end up lower than they were at the
beginning.
We may now sum up this section. Capital formation is financed not only out of
profits but also out of an expansion of credit. This speeds up the growth of capital,
and the growth of real income. It also results in some redistribution of the national
income, either temporarily or permanently, according to the assumptions one makes
in the model we are using, the redistribution is only temporary. It also prevents
prices from falling, as they otherwise would (if money is constant and output
rising), and it may drive prices up substantially if (as in our model) the distribution
of income cannot be altered permanently by monetary measures, since prices will
then continue to rise until real output has risen enough to effect the required
redistribution. Thereafter prices fall further, since inflation raises prices while
capital is being created, but the increased output which then results brings them
down again.
One point remains. We have seen that if new money is used to finance capital
formation the rise of prices eventually peters out, as savings grow into equilibrium
with investment ; and reverses itself, as the output of consumer goods begins to
pour out. The new equilibrium, however, may take a long time to reach, and if also
the flow of new money is substantial the resulting rise of prices may strike fear into
the hearts of the public. People do not panic if prices rise for two or three years ;
but after that they may begin to lose confidence in money, and it may become
necessary to call a drastic halt. This is the most important practical limitation on the
extent to which capital formation can be financed in this way. This is why the
banking authorities have always tended to alternate short periods of easy credit with
sharp periods of restriction. Bank credit moves three steps up and one step down
instead of moving up continuously. This also brings us to the threshold of the trade
cycle. If capital were financed exclusively out of profits, and if there were also no
hoarding, capital formation would proceed steadily. It is mainly the existence of an
elastic credit system which makes the trade cycle an integral part of the mechanism
of economic development in an unplanned economy. It is not necessary, however,
for us to enter into analysis of the cycle since in this respect the model we are using
does not yield results different from those of other models.
7. We have said very little so far about the activities of government, since our basic
model uses only capitalists, their employees, and subsistence producers.
Governments affect the process of capital accumulation in many ways, however,
and not least by the inflations into which they run. Many governments in backward
countries are also currently anxious to use surplus man-power for capital formation,
and as there is a great deal that can be done with labour and a few tools (roads,
irrigation, river walls, schools and so on), it is useful to say something on the
subject. We shall therefore in this section analyse the effect of inflation-financed
government formation of capital, and thereby also give ourselves the chance to
recapitulate the analysis of the previous section.

16

W.A.Lewis on Development with Unlimited Supplies of Labor
The results, it will be remembered, lie within two extremes. At one extreme all the
money spent by the government comes back to it in taxes, and this is accepted by
all classes. In this case, prices rise very little. At the other extreme, all classes
refuse to accept a redistribution between themselves and the government. In this
case prices tend to rise continuously, except that rising output (as a result of the
capital formed) sooner or later catches up with prices and brings them down again.
Rising output will also increase the government’s “normal” share of the national
income, and all monetary pressure will cease when the “normal” share has risen to
the level of the inflated share which it was trying to get.
These results give us the questions we must ask. (1). What part of marginal income
returns automatically to the government? (2). What effect does inflation have upon
the various classes? And (3). What effect has government capital formation upon
output?
(One other point must be remembered. In all this analysis so far we have assumed a
closed economy. In an open economy inflation plays havoc with the balance of
payments. We have therefore to assume that the government has strict control over
foreign transactions. This assumption holds for some backward economies ; others
would get into an awful mess if they launched upon inflationary finance).
It is not possible that all the money spent by the government should come back to it
in the first round, since this would presume that the government took 100 per cent.
of marginal income. If the government takes any part of marginal income, some of
the money will come back to it ; but even the Keynesian multiplier will not bring it
all back unless taxation is the only leakage (i.e. there is no saving). The larger the
government’s share of marginal incomes, the more it will get back, the quicker it
will get it, and the smaller will be the effect on prices.
Since the second world war a number of governments of modern industrial states
seem to be taking around 40 to 50 per cent. of marginal incomes in taxation, and
this is one of the major reasons why their price levels have not risen more, despite
heavy pressure on resources for capital formation, defence, etc. In backward
countries, however, governments take only a very small part of marginal incomes.
The best placed governments from this point of view are those in countries where
output is concentrated in a few large units (mines, plantations) and therefore easily
taxed, or where foreign trade is a large part of the national income, and is thus
easily reached by import and export duties. One of the worst off is India, with a
large part of its output produced by subsistence producers and small scale units,
hard to reach, and with less than ten per cent. of national income passing in foreign
trade. In many cases, marginal taxation is less than average taxation, for when
money incomes rise, the government continues to charge the same prices for
railway travel or for stamps, and hesitates to raise land taxes on the peasants, with
the result that money incomes rise faster than government receipts. No government
should consider deficit financing without assuring itself that a large part of
increases in money income will automatically come back to itself. By contrast, the
U.S.S.R., with its very high rate of turnover tax, automatically mops up surplus
funds injected into the system, before they are able to generate much demand
inflation via the multiplier process.
The next question is the effect of inflation upon the distribution of income. The
surplus money raises prices, some more than others. The government will probably
try to prevent prices from rising, but will succeed better with some than with others.
It is easy to apply price control to large scale enterprises, but very hard to prevent
the farmers from raising food prices, or the petty traders from making big margins.
From the point of view of capital formation, the best thing that can happen is for the

17

W.A.Lewis on Development with Unlimited Supplies of Labor
surplus money to roll into the pockets of people who will reinvest it productively.
The merchant classes would probably use it mainly for speculation in those
commodities that are getting scarce. The middle-classes would mainly buy big
American cars with it, or go on trips to Europe, wangling the foreign exchange
somehow. The peasants ought to use it to improve their farms, but probably most
would use it only to pay off debt, or to buy more land. There is really only one class
that is pretty certain to reinvest its profits productively, and that is the class of
industrialists. The effects of an inflation on secondary capital formation therefore
depend first on how large the industrial class is, and secondly on whether the
benefit goes largely to this class. In countries which have only a small industrial
class, inflation leads mainly to speculation in commodities and in land, and to the
hoarding of foreign exchange. But in any country which has a substantial
industrialist class, with the passion this class has for ruling over. bigger and better
factories, even the most frightening inflations (e.g. Germany from 1919) leave
behind a substantial increase in capital formation. (Have we hit here upon some
deep psychological instinct which drives the industrialist to use his wealth more
creatively than others? Probably not. It is just that his job is of the kind where
passion for success results in capital formation. The peasant farmer wants to have
more land, not more capital on his land (unless he is a modern capitalist farmer) so
his passion is dissipated merely in changes in the price and distribution of land. The
merchant wants to have a wider margin, or a quicker turnover, neither of which
increases fixed capital. The banker wants more deposits. Only the industralist’s
passion drives towards using profits to create a bigger empire of bricks and steel). It
follows that it is in industrial communities that inflations are most helpful to capital
formation ; whereas in countries where the industrial class is negligible there is
nothing to show for the inflation when it is over, except the original investment
which started it off. We should also note that many governments do not like the fact
that inflation enables industrialists to earn the extra profits with which they create
fixed capital, since this results in an increase of private fortunes. They therefore do
all they can to prevent the inflation from increasing the profits of industrialists.
More especially, they clamp down on industrial prices, which are also from the
administrative point of view the easiest prices to control. Since it is the industrialist
class which saves most, the result is to exacerbate the inflation. It would be much
sounder to pursue policies which would result in the profits of industrialists rising
more rapidly than other incomes, and then to tax these profits away, either
immediately, or at death.
Inflation continues to be generated so long as the community is not willing to hold
an amount equal to the increased investment expenditure. It is not therefore enough
that savings should increase to this extent, for if these savings are used for
additional investment the initial gap still remains. The gap is closed only if the
savings are hoarded, or used to buy government bonds, so that the government can
now finance its investments by borrowing, instead of by creating new money.
Hence in practice, if the government wishes the inflation to be ended without
reducing its investment, it must find means of bringing into its coffers as much in
taxes or in loans as it is, spending. If it is failing to do this, the inflation will
continue ; it is then better that it should continue because capitalists are spending
their profits on further capital formation than because other classes are chasing a
limited output of consumer goods; but if it is desired to end inflation as soon as
possible, all classes should be encouraged to invest in government bonds rather
than to spend in other ways. Finally we come to the relation between capital and
output. If the intention is to finance capital formation by creating credit, the best
objects for such a policy are those which yield a large income quickly. To finance
school building by creating credit is asking for trouble. On the other hand, there are
a lot of agricultural programmes (water supplies, fertilisers, seed farms, extension)
where quick and substantial results may be expected from modest expenditure. If

18

W.A.Lewis on Development with Unlimited Supplies of Labor
there are idle resources available for capital formation it is foolish not to use them
simply because of technical or political difficulties in raising taxes. But it would be
equally foolish to use them on programmes which take a long time to give a small
result, when there are others which could give a large result quickly.
We may sum up as follows. If labour is abundant and physical resources scarce, the
primary effect on output is exactly the same whether the government creates capital
out of taxation or out of credit creation : the output of consumer goods is
unchanged, but is redistributed. Hence credit creation must be seen primarily as an
alternative to taxation, which is worth the troubles it brings only if trying to raise
taxes would bring even more troubles. Credit creation has however one further lead
upon taxation in that if it also redistributes income towards the industrial class (if
there is an industrial class), it will speed up capital formation out of profits. If it is
impossible to increase taxation, and the alternative is between creating capital out
of credit, and not creating it at all, the choice one has then to make is between
stable prices or rising output. There is no simple formula for making this choice. In
some communities any further inflation of prices would ruin their fragile social or
political equilibrium ; in others this equilibrium will be destroyed if there is not a
sharp increase in output in the near future ; and in still others the equilibrium will
be ruined either way.
8. We may now resume our analysis. We have seen that if unlimited labour is
available at a constant real wage, the capitalist surplus will rise continuously, and
annual investment will be a rising proportion of the national income. Needless to
say, this cannot go on forever.
The process must stop when capital accumulation has caught up with population, so
that there is no longer surplus labour. But it may stop before that. It may stop of
course for any number of reasons which are outside our system of analysis, ranging
from earthquake or bubonic plague to social revolution. But it may also stop for the
economic reason that, although there is a labour surplus, real wages may
nevertheless rise so high as to reduce capitalists’ profits to the level at which profits
are all consumed and there is no net investment.
This may happen for one of four reasons. First, if capital accumulation is
proceeding faster than population growth, and is therefore reducing absolutely the
number of people in the subsistence sector, the average product per man in that
sector rises automatically, not because production alters, but because there are
fewer mouths to share the product. After a while the change actually becomes
noticeable, and the capitalist wage begins to be forced up. Secondly, the increase in
the size of the capitalist sector relatively to the subsistence sector may turn the
terms of trade against the capitalist sector (if they are producing different things)
and so force the capitalists to pay workers a higher percentage of their product, in
order to keep their real income constant. Thirdly, the subsistence sector may also
become more productive in the technical sense. For example, it may begin to
imitate the techniques of the capitalist sector ; the peasants may get hold of some of
the new seeds, or hear about the new fertilisers or rotations. They may also benefit
directly from some of the capitalist investments, e.g., in irrigation works, in
transport facilities, or in electricity. Anything which raises the productivity of the
subsistence sector (average per person) will raise real wages in the capitalist sector,
and will therefore reduce the capitalist surplus and the rate of capital accumulation,
unless it at the same time more than correspondingly moves the terms of trade
against the subsistence sector. Alternatively,, even if the productivity of the
capitalist sector is unchanged, the workers in the capitalist sector may imitate the
capitalist way of life,` and may thus need more to live on. The subsistence level is
only a conventional idea, and conventions change. The effect of this would be to

19

W.A.Lewis on Development with Unlimited Supplies of Labor
widen the gap between earnings in the subsistence sector, and wages in the
capitalist sector. This is hard to do, if labour is abundant, but it may be achieved by
a combination of trade union pressure and capitalist conscience. If it is achieved, it
will reduce the capitalist surplus, and also the rate of capital accumulation.
The most interesting of these possibilities is that the terms of trade may move
against the capitalist sector. This assumes that the capitalist and subsistence sectors
are producing different things. In practice this is a question of the relationship
between industry and agriculture. If the capitalists are investing in plantation
agriculture side by side with their investment in industry, we can think of the
capitalist sector as self-contained. The expansion of this sector does not then
generate any demand for anything produced in the subsistence sector, and there are
therefore no terms of trade to upset the picture we have drawn. To bring the terms
of trade in, the simplest assumption to make is that the subsistence sector consists
of peasants producing food, while the capitalist sector produces everything else.
Now if the capitalist sector produces no food, its expansion increases the demand
for food, raises the price of food in terms of capitalist products, and so reduces
profits. This is one of the senses in which industrialisation is dependent upon
agricultural improvement ; it is not profitable to produce a growing volume of
manufactures unless agricultural production is growing simultaneously. This is also
why industrial and agrarian revolutions always go together, and why economies in
which agriculture is stagnant do not show industrial development. Hence, if we
postulate that the capitalist sector is not producing food, we must either postulate
that the subsistence sector is increasing its output, or else conclude that the
expansion of the capitalist sector will be brought to an end through adverse terms of
trade eating into profits. (Ricardo’s problem of increasing rents is first cousin to this
conclusion ; he worried about rents increasing inside the capitalist sector, whereas
we are dealing with rents outside the sector).
On the other hand, if we assume that the subsistence sector is producing more food,
while we escape the Scylla of adverse terms of trade we may be caught by the
Charybdis of real wages rising because the subsistence sector is more productive.
We escape both Scylla and Charybdis if rising productivity in the subsistence sector
is more than offset by improving terms of trade. However, if the subsistence sector
is producing food, the elasticity of demand for which is-less than unity, increases in
productivity will be more than offset by reductions in price. A rise in the
productivity of the subsistence sector hurts the capitalist sector if there is no trade
between the two, or if the demand of the capitalist sector for the subsistence
sector’s product is elastic. On the assumptions we have made, a rise in food
productivity benefits the capitalist sector. Nevertheless, when we take rising
demand into account, it is not at all unlikely that the price of food will not fall as
fast as productivity increases, and this will force the capitalists to pay out a larger
part of their product as wages.
If there is no hope of prices falling as fast as productivity increases (because
demand is increasing), the capitalists’ next best move is to prevent the farmer from
getting all his extra production. In Japan this was achieved by raising rents against
the farmers, and by taxing them more heavily, so that a large part of the rapid
increase in productivity which occurred (between 1880 and 1910 it doubled) was
taken away from the farmers and used for capital formation ; at the same time the
holding down of the farmers’ income itself held down wages, to the advantage of
profits in the capitalist sector. Much the same happened in the U.S.S.R., where farm
incomes per head were held down, in spite of farm mechanisation and the considerable release of labour to the towns ; this was done jointly by raising the prices
of manufactures relatively to farm products, and also by levying heavy taxes upon

20

W.A.Lewis on Development with Unlimited Supplies of Labor
the collective farms.
This also defines for us the case in which it is true to say that it is agriculture which
finances industrialisation. If the capitalist sector is self-contained, its expansion is
in no way dependent upon the peasants. The surplus is wholly “at the expense” of
the workers in the capitalist sector. But if the capitalist sector depends upon the
peasants for food, it is essential to get the peasants to produce more, while if at the
same time they can be prevented from enjoying the full fruit of their extra
production, wages can be reduced relatively to the capitalist surplus. By contrast a
state which is ruled by peasants may be happy and prosperous, but it is not likely to
show such a rapid accumulation of capital. (E.g., will China and the U.S.S.R.
diverge in this respect ?).
We conclude, therefore, that the expansion of the capitalist sector may be stopped
because the price of subsistence goods rises, or because the price is not falling as
fast as subsistence productivity per head is rising, or because capitalist workers
raise their standard of what they need for subsistence. Any of these would raise
wages relatively to the surplus. If none of these processes is enough to stop capital
accumulation, the capitalist sector will continue to expand until there is no surplus
labour left. This can happen even if population is growing. For example, if it takes
3 per cent. of annual income invested to employ 1 per cent. more people, an annual
net investment of 12 per cent. can cope with as much as a 4 per cent. increase in
population. But population in Western Europe at the relevant times grew only by 1
per cent. or so per annum (which is also the present rate of growth in India), and
rates of growth exceeding 2J per cent. per annum are even now rather rare. We
cannot say that capital will always grow faster than labour (it obviously has not
done so in Asia), but we can say that if conditions are favourable for the capitalist
surplus to grow more rapidly than population, there must come a day when capital
accumulation has caught up with labour supply. Ricardo and Malthus did not
provide for this in their models, because they over-estimated the rate of growth of
population. Marx did not provide for it either, because he had persuaded himself
that capital accumulation increases unemployment instead of reducing it, (he has a
curious model in which the short run effect of accumulation is to reduce
unemployment, raise wages and thus provoke a crisis, while the long run effect is to
increase the reserve army of unemployed). Of the classical economists only Adam
Smith saw clearly that capital accumulation would eventually create a shortage of
labour, and raise wages above the subsistence level.
When the labour surplus disappears our model of the closed economy no longer
holds. Wages are no longer tied to a subsistence level. Adam Smith thought they
would then depend upon the degree of monopoly (a doctrine which was
re-presented in the 1930’s as one of the novelties of modern economic analysis).
The neo-classicists invented the doctrine of marginal productivity. The problem is
not yet solved to anyone’s satisfaction, except in static models which take no
account of capital accumulation and of technical progress. It is, however, outside
the terms of reference of this essay and we will not pursue it here.
Our task is not, however, finished. In the classical world all countries have surplus
labour. In the neo-classical world labour is scarce in all countries. In the real world,
however, countries which achieve labour scarcity continue to be surrounded by
others which have abundant labour. Instead of concentrating on one country, and
examining the expansion of its capitalist sector, we now have to see this country as
part of the expanding capitalist sector of the world economy as a whole, and to
enquire how the distribution of income inside the country and its rate of capital
accumulation, are affected by the fact that there is abundant labour available
elsewhere at a subsistence wage.

21

W.A.Lewis on Development with Unlimited Supplies of Labor
II. The Open Economy.
9. When capital accumulation catches up with the labour supply, wages begin to
rise above the subsistence level, and the capitalist surplus is adversely affected.
However, if there is still surplus labour in other countries, the capitalists can avoid
this in one of two ways, by encouraging immigration or by exporting their capital to
countries where there is still abundant labour at a subsistence wage. We must
examine each of these in turn.
10. Let us first clear out of the way the effects of the immigration of skilled
workers, since our main concern is with an abundant immigration of unskilled
workers released by the subsistence sectors of other countries. It is theoretically
possible that the immigration of skilled workers may reduce the demand for the
services of native unskilled workers, but this is most unlikely. More probably it
will make possible new investments and industries which were not possible before,
and will thus increase the demand for all kinds of labour, relatively to its supply.
We must also get out of the way relatively small immigrations. If 100,000 Puerto
Ricans emigrate to the United States every year, the effect on U.S. wages is
negligible. U.S. wages are not pulled down to the Puerto Rican level ; it is Puerto
Rican wages which are then pulled up to the U.S. level.
Mass immigration is quite a different kettle of fish. If there were free immigration
from India and China to the U.S.A., the wage level of the U.S.A. would certainly be
pulled down towards the Indian and Chinese levels. In fact in a competitive model
the U.S. wage could exceed the Asian wage only by an amount covering migration
costs plus the “cliff” to which we have already referred. The result is the same
whether one assumes increasing or diminishing returns to labour. Wages are
constant at subsistence level plus. All the benefit of increasing returns goes into the
capitalist surplus.
This is one of the reasons why, in every country where the wage level is relatively
high, the trade unions are bitterly hostile to immigration, except of people in special
categories, and take steps to have it restricted. The result is that real wages are
higher than they would otherwise be, while profits, capital resources, and total
output are smaller than they would otherwise be.
11. The export of capital is therefore a much easier way out for the capitalists, since
trade unions are quick to restrict immigration, but much slower in bringing the
export of capital under control.
The effect of exporting capital is to reduce the creation of fixed capital at home, and
therefore to reduce the demand for labour. Labour will still be required to create the
capital (e.g. to make machines for export), but domestic labour will no longer be
required to work with the capital, as it would also be if the capital were invested at
home.
This, however, is only one side of the picture, for the capital may be used in foreign
countries in ways which raise the standard of living of the capital exporting country
(and so offset wholly or partly the first effect), or-in ways which lower it (thus
aggravating the first effect). The result depends on the type of competition which
there is between the capital exporting and the capital importing countries.
12. Let us assume, to begin with, that there is no competition, and even no trade.
Both countries are self-sufficient. Wages however are rising in country A, while

22

W.A.Lewis on Development with Unlimited Supplies of Labor
labour is abundant in country B. A’s capitalists therefore invest their capital in B.
Trade returns show first the export surplus from A, representing the transfer of
capital, and later the import surplus representing the return home of dividends.
There is no effect on the workers in A other than that their wages cease to rise, as
they would have if the capital were invested instead at home. If A’s resources and
B’s resources are exactly the same, wages cannot rise in A until capital
accumulation in B has wiped out B’s labour surplus.
Now in the real world the resources of two countries are not exactly alike, and it
cannot be taken for granted that it will be more profitable to invest in B if profits
are falling in A (which also cannot be taken for granted). The profitability of
investing in a country depends upon its natural resources, upon its human material,
and upon the amount of capital already invested there.
The most productive investments are those which are made to open up rich, easily
accessible natural resources, such as fertile soil, ores, coal or oil. This is the
principal reason why most of the capital exported in the last hundred years went to
the Americas and to Australasia rather than to India or to China, where the known
resources were already being used. In the well developed parts of the world (in the
resource sense) the main opportunity for’ productive investment lies in improving
techniques-these countries are well (even over-) developed in the resource sense,
but under-developed in their techniques. It is profitable to use capital to introduce
new techniques, but this is not as profitable as using capital to make available both
new techniques and also new resources. This also explains why the United
Kingdom rapidly became a capital exporting country (the limits of its natural
resources were soon reached), whereas the United States is very late in reaching
this stage, since its natural resources are so extensive that capital investment at
home is still very profitable even though wages are very high.
Productivity depends also on the human material. Even though the genetic
composition of peoples may be much the same, as far as potential productivity may
be concerned, their cultural inheritance is very different. Differences in literacy,
forms of government, attitudes to work, and social relations generally may make a
big difference to productivity. Capitalists naturally find it more profitable and safer
to invest in countries where the atmosphere is capitalist than they do in widely
different cultures.
But this is not all. For the productivity of investment in B depends not only upon
B’s natural resources and its human institutions, but also upon the efficiency of all
other industries whose services the new investment would require to use. This
depends partly upon how highly capitalised these other industries are. The
productivity of one investment depends upon other investments having been made
before. Hence it may be more profitable to invest capital in countries which already
have a lot of capital than to invest it in a new country. If this were always so, no
capital would be exported, and the gap between wages in the surplus (labour) and
non-surplus countries would not diminish but would widen. In practice capital
export is small, and the gap does widen, and we cannot at all exclude the possibility
that there is a natural tendency for capital to flow towards the capitalised, and to
shun the un-capitalised.
If we could assume that there is a natural tendency for the rate of profit to fall in a
closed economy, we could say that however low the rate may be in other countries,
the rate in the closed economy must ultimately fall towards the level elsewhere,
after which capital export must begin. Practically all the best known economists of
every school, in every century, have affirmed that such a tendency exists, though
their reasons have varied widely. The most notable exception is Marshall, who gave

23

W.A.Lewis on Development with Unlimited Supplies of Labor
the right answer, which is that increasing capital per head tends to lower the yield
of capital, while increasing technical knowledge tends to raise it. Thus, said
Marshall, the yield fell from 10 per cent. in the Middle Ages to 3 per cent. in the
middle of the eighteenth century-a long period of slow technical growth-after which
the decline was arrested by the great increase in opportunities for using capital. This
being so, the natural tendency for the yield of capital to fall is nothing but a popular
myth. The yield may fall or it may not; we cannot foretell.
We get a different answer, however, if we turn from the rate of profit on capital in
general to the rate in particular lines of investment. In any particular line the
possibilities of further expansion are soon exhausted, or at any rate greatly reduced.
All industries develop on a logistic pattern, growing fairly slowly at first, then
rapidly, and later on growing again quite slowly. Hence the investors in any
particular line sooner or later come to a point where there is not much more scope
for investment in that line at home. It is open to them to put their accumulating
profits into quite different industries. But there is also the temptation to stick to the
field in which they have specialised knowledge, and to use their profits to take the
industry into new countries.
What brings about the exportation of capital is not inevitably falling home profits,
or rising wages at home, but simply the fact that foreign countries having different
resources unutilised in different degrees there are some profitable opportunities for
investment abroad. This is not even dependent on capital accumulation having
caught up with surplus labour at home; for even if there is still surplus labour at
home, available at subsistence wages, investment opportunities abroad may be
more profitable. Many capitalists residing in surplus labour countries invest their
capital in England or the United States.
We must therefore beware of saying that a country will begin to export capital as
soon as capital accumulation at home catches up with labour supply. All the same,
countries do export capital, and we can say that if labour is scarce in those
countries, the effect is to reduce the demand for labour in those countries and thus
to prevent wages from rising as much as they otherwise would.
13. Let us now assume that the two countries do not compete, but trade with each
other. There are two variants of this case. One where the two countries produce
only one good, but a different good in each. Here wage levels are not determined in
relation to each other. In the second case, each country produces two or more
goods, one of which is common to both, and is the good produced in the
subsistence sector.
Suppose that in the first case country A produces wheat, and country 13 produces
peanuts. Relative prices are determined solely by supply and demand. Assume that
a capitalist sector develops in A, applying new techniques to wheat production. At
first it may get unlimited labour at an average wage in wheat related to average
subsistence wheat production. In due course, however, the surplus is eliminated and
wheat wages start to rise. If the capitalist techniques which fructified wheat
production are equally applicable to peanuts, it will pay to export capital to B,
where unlimited labour is available at a wage related to average subsistence output
of peanuts.
As in the case discussed before, wages in A will be held down by the profitability
of investing capital in B. A new element, however enters into consideration,
because of the effects of investment on the terms of trade. When capital is being
invested in A, and raising the output of wheat, the price of peanuts will rise
relatively. Hence the capitalist workers in A as well as subsistence workers in A

24

W.A.Lewis on Development with Unlimited Supplies of Labor
will be worse off in terms of peanuts, though earning the same real wage in wheat.
And the workers in B will be better off in terms of wheat, while earning the same in
peanuts. When capital is invested in B the opposite happens : the terms of trade are
moved against the B workers in favour of the A workers.
The moral is that capital export may benefit the workers on balance if it is applied
to increasing the supply of things they import. For example, in the Britain of 1850
exclusive investment at home in the cotton industry, while tending to raise wages,
might also still more have depressed the terms of trade against the cotton industry.
When we pass to the second case, the result is the same, except that the terms of
trade are now determinate. Assume that both countries produce food, but do not
trade in it. Country A also produces steel, and country B also produces rubber. If B
can release unlimited supplies of labour from subsistence food production, wages in
B will equal average (not marginal) product in food (abstracting from the difference
between subsistence and capitalist wages). In A also the wage cannot fall below
productivity in the food industry. We may simplify by assuming in the first instance
that labour is the sole factor of production and that one day’s labour
in A produces
in B
“

3 food or 3 steel
1 food or 1 rubber.

Earnings in A will then be three times earnings in B (the difference in food
productivity). And the rate of exchange will be 1 food = 1 steel = 1 rubber. Suppose
now that productivity increases in B’s rubber industry only, so that one day’s labour
produces instead 3 rubber. This is excellent for the workers in A, since 1 steel will
now buy 3 rubber. But it will do the workers in B no good whatsoever (except in so
far as they purchase rubber), since their wage will continue to be 1 food. If on the
other hand the subsistence economy became more productive, wages would rise
correspondingly. Suppose that 1 day’s labour in B now produced 3 food or 1
rubber, wages would be as high in B as in A, and the price of rubber would now be
1 rubber = 3 steel. Workers in A are benefitted if productivity in B increases in
what they buy, and are worse off if productivity in B increases in B’s subsistence
sector. Workers in B are benefitted only if productivity increases in their
subsistence sector ; all other increases in productivity are lost in the terms of trade.
We have here the key to the question why tropical produce is so cheap. Take for
example the case of sugar. This is an industry in which productivity is extremely
high by any biological standard. It is also an industry in which output per acre has
about trebled over the course of the last 75 years, a rate of growth of productivity
which is unparalled by any other major industry in the world-certainly not by the
wheat industry. Nevertheless workers in the sugar industry continue to walk
barefooted and to live in shacks, while workers in wheat enjoy among the highest
living standards in the world. The reason is that wages in the sugar industry are
related to the fact that the subsistence sectors of tropical economies are able to
release however many workers the sugar industry may want, at wages which are
low, because tropical food production per head is low. However vastly productive
the sugar industry may become, the benefit accrues chiefly to industrial purchasers
in the form of lower prices for sugar. (The capitalists who invest in sugar do not
come into the argument because their earnings are determined not by productivity
in sugar but by the general rate of profit on capital ; this is why our leaving capital
out of this and subsequent analysis of the effects of changing productivity upon
wages and the terms of trade simplifies the analysis without significantly affecting
its results). To raise the price of sugar, you must increase the productivity of the
tropical subsistence food economies. Now the contribution of the temperate world
to the tropical world, whether in capital or in knowledge, has in the main been

25

W.A.Lewis on Development with Unlimited Supplies of Labor
confined to the commercial crops for export, where the benefit mainly accrues to
the temperate world in lower prices. The prices of tropical commercial crops will
always permit only subsistence wages until, for a change, capital and knowledge
are put at the disposal of the subsistence producers to increase the productivity of
tropical food production for home consumption.
The analysis applies to all tropical commercial products of which an unlimited
supply can be produced because unlimited natural resources exist, in relation to
demand-e.g., land of suitable quality. It does not apply where natural resources of a
particular kind are scarce. For example, the lands suitable for cultivating sugar or
peanuts are very extensive. But mineral bearing lands, or lands with just the right
suitability for cocoa, are relatively scarce. Hence the price of a mineral, or of cocoa,
may rise to any level consistent with demand.. If the lands are owned by capitalists,
employing workers, this will make little difference to their wages. But if these
scarce lands are owned by peasants, the peasants may of course become rich. In
general the peasants have got little out of their mineral bearing lands, especially
when these have been expropriated by imperial governments (or declared to be
Crown property) and sold to foreign capitalists for a song. Cocoa is the only case (a
doubtful one) where it seems that a world scarcity of suitable land may now
permanently bring to the peasants earnings higher than they could obtain from
subsistence food production.
This is not to say that the tropical countries gain nothing from having foreign
capital invested in commercial production for export. They gain an additional
source of employment, and of taxation. The accumulation of fixed capital in their
midst also brings nearer the day when the demand for labour will catch up with the
supply (though even this will- not raise wages in any one tropical country until they
start to rise in all, since capital would otherwise merely transfer itself to the
countries where there is still a surplus). What they do not gain is rising real wages
:the whole benefit of increasing product v ty in the commercial sector goes to the
foreign consumer, at least in the ear y s ages. n the latest stages they may also gain
if their peasants imitate the capitalist techniques, so that sub sistence productivity
rises ; or if the continual increase in the output of commercial crops moves the
terms of trade in favour of subsistence food production ; either of these changes
would react upon real wages (see section 8), but would do so effectively only when
the changes have extended throughout the tropical world.
14. In the next case we assume that the two countries can produce the same things,
and trade with each other. A is the country where labour is scarce, B the country
where unlimited labour is available in the subsistence (food) sector. Using the
classical framework for the Law of Comparative Costs we write that one day’s
labour
in A produces
3 food or 3 cotton manufactures
in B
2 „ or 1
“
This, of course, gives the wrong answer to the question “who should specialise in
which,” since we have written the average instead of the marginal products. We can
assume that these coincide in A, and also in cotton manufacture in B. Then we
should write, in marginal terms,
in A produces
3 food or 3 cotton manufactures
in B
“
0“
or 1
“
B should specialise in cotton manufacture and import food. In practice, however,
wages will be 2 food in B and between 3 food and 6 food in A, at which levels it
will be “cheaper” for B to export food and import cotton.

26

W.A.Lewis on Development with Unlimited Supplies of Labor
This divergence between the actual and what it ought to be is the most serious
difference which the existence of surplus labour makes to the neo-classical theory
of international trade. It has caught out many economists, who have wrongly
advised under-developed countries on the basis of current money costs, instead of
lifting the veil to see what lies beneath. It has also caught out many countries,
which have allowed (or been forced to allow) their industries to be destroyed by
cheap foreign imports, with the sole effect of increasing the size of the labour
surplus, when the national income would have been increased if the domestic
industries had instead been protected against imports. The fault is not that of the
Law of Comparative Costs, which remains valid if written in real marginal terms,
but of those who have forgotten that money costs are entirely misleading in
economies .where there is surplus labour at the ruling wage.
Of course if labour is a free good but the two industries use some scarce resource,
such as land or capital, the comparison has to be made not in terms of labour cost
but in terms of the scarce resource. Thus, even though labour is unemployed, it may
be more economic to use capital to increase the production of food than to use it in
creating new manufacturing industries. Adam Smith was as usual on the ball; this
was the substance of his argument that a tariff could not raise the national income
even if it increased employment, since it would simply be diverting capital from
more to less productive uses. (The Keynesian model doesn’t help, since it assumes
unlimited capital as well as unemployment). All the same, there may be cases
where it is more economic to use capital to create new industries, rather than to
fructify old ones, and where this is nevertheless not the most profitable thing to do,
in the financial sense, because labour has to be paid a wage when its marginal
productivity is really zero. Moreover, many manufacturing activities do not in fact
use any other scarce resource but labour. The handicraft and cottage industries
especially, which may provide employment for up to ten per cent. of the people in
backward countries, use no capital resources to speak of. Yet these are the very first
industries to be destroyed by cheap imports of manufactures (e.g. the havoc
wrought to the Indian cotton industry in the first half of the nineteenth century).
The Law of Comparative Costs, rightly applied, enables us to predict the pattern of
international trade. We can say that those countries which have inadequate
agricultural resources in relation to their populations (e.g. India, Japan, Egypt,
Great Britain, Jamaica) must live by importing agricultural products and exporting
manufactures ; metal manufactures if they have the coal and, ores (India, Great
Britain) and light manufactures if they have not (Japan, Egypt, Jamaica).
Correspondingly countries which are rich in agricultural land (U.S.A., Argentina),
should be net exporters of agricultural products at relatively good terms of trade.
Currently this pattern is distorted by the divergence between money and real costs.
But if world population continues to grow at its current rate, this pattern must
emerge in due course, unless there are revolutionary developments in agricultural
science.
Let us, however continue to examine this case, assuming that no distortion is taking
place. As before A is developed while B has surplus labour in food. Suppose that
one day’s labour
in A produces 5 food or 5 cotton manufactures
in B
“
1 “
or 3
“
(average)
B ought to specialise in cotton, and will actually do so. Wages and prices are
determinate. The wage in B will be 1 food, the price of cotton will be 1 cotton
equals j food, the wage in A will be 5 food, and A will get all the benefit of the
exchange. Suppose now that productivity increases in B’s cotton industry. B’s wage
is unchanged, and the whole benefit accrues to A. But if productivity increases in

27

W.A.Lewis on Development with Unlimited Supplies of Labor
B’s food industry (the average rising say from 1 to 2) B’s wage will rise (from 1
food to 2 food). A’s wage will still be 5 food, but cotton will now be dearer (1
cotton equals I food), to the advantage of B and disadvantage of A. (B’s wage is
determinate because there is unlimited labour available at a subsistence wage ; and
all the benefit of the exchange goes to A because B is producing both
commodities).
15. It is time to say a word about the effect of increasing the subsistence
productivity in countries with surplus labour. The analysis is the same as we made
for the closed economy (section 8), except that we must now think of the world as a
whole as the closed economy. We must also think of the commercial sector of these
economies as being a part of the world capitalist sector.
Then, if the world capitalist sector is not dependent on the peasants for food, even
to feed its plantation and mining labourers in the surplus countries, an increase in
the productivity of the peasants must raise wages against the capitalists. To have
this effect, however, productivity must rise in all these countries, otherwise the
capitalists will simply transfer from those countries where subsistence productivity
has risen to those where it has not.
If, on the other hand, we assume that the capitalists need the peasants’ food, and
that the demand for food is inelastic, then increased productivity reduces the price
of food even more, and so reduces the share of capitalist workers in the capitalist
product. This again assumes that the changes are world-wide; if one country raises
its productivity, the price of food will not fall; wages will rise in that country, and
capitalists will move elsewhere. However, even if the price of food falls, the
peasants eat most of their output, and will still be better off. For example, suppose a
peasant produces 100 food, eats 80 food, and sells 20 food for 20 manufactures.
Suppose now that his productivity increases to 200, reducing the price of food by
more than half, say to 0.4. The peasant can now have 30 manufactures, costing 75
food, and still eat 125 food instead of 80. The standard of living in the surplus
countries is thus raised nearer to that of the advanced countries, but the terms of
trade move against both the food and the commercial products of the surplus
countries (would move in favour of the commercial products if the elasticity of
demand for food were 1.0 or more).
In practice, food production in tropical countries with surplus labour is only a small
part of world food production (Asia and Africa together produce less than 20 per
cent. of the world’s food). Hence increases in food productivity in the tropics could
not reduce the price of food Pari passu. Real wages would therefore rise, and the
terms of trade would move in favour of tropical commercial products. This would
hurt labour in the industrial countries in so far as it was buying such products, and
benefit it in so far as tropical countries were competing in industrial production.
16. This brings us finally to the case where the two countries A and B produce
competing goods to sell in third markets. This need not detain us long. If capital is
exported in ways which raise subsistence productivity in the capital importing
country, the workers in the capital exporting country will benefit, since the wages
of their rivals will be raised. If, however, it is exported to increase productivity in
the exporting sector of the capital importing country, the workers in the capital
exporting country will be doubly hit, first by the reduced capital accumulation at
home, and then again by the fall in their rivals’ prices.
17. We may conclude as follows. Capital export tends to reduce wages in capital
exporting countries. This is wholly or partly offset if the capital is applied to
cheapening the things which the workers import, or to raising wage costs in

28

W.A.Lewis on Development with Unlimited Supplies of Labor
countries which compete in third markets (by raising productivity in their
subsistence sectors). The reduction in wages is however aggravated if the capital is
invested in ways which raise the cost of imports (by increasing productivity in
subsistence sectors), or which increase the productivity of competing exports. We
have also seen that capital importing countries with surplus labour do not gain an
increase in real wages from having foreign capital invested in them, unless this
capital results in increased productivity in the commodities they produce for their
own consumption.
III. Summary.
18. We may summarise this article as follows
1. In many economies an unlimited supply of labour is available at a subsistence
wage. This was the classical model. The neo-classical model (including the
Keynesian) when applied to such economies gives erroneous results.
2. The main sources from which workers come as economic development proceeds
are subsistence agriculture, casual labour, petty trade, domestic service, wives and
daughters in the household, and the increase of population. In most but not all of
these sectors, if the country is overpopulated relatively to its natural resources, the
marginal productivity of labour is negligible, zero, or even negative.
3. The subsistence wage at which this surplus labour is available for employment
may be determined by a conventional
view of the minimum required for subsistence ; or it may be equal to the average
product per man in subsistence agriculture,
plus a margin.
4. In such an economy employment expands in a capitalist sector as capital
formation occurs.
5. Capital formation and technical progress result not in raising wages, but in
raising the share of profits in the national income.
‘6. The reason why savings are low in an undeveloped economy relatively to
national income is not that the people are poor, but that capitalist profits are low
relatively to national income. As the capitalist sector expands, profits grow
relatively, and an increasing proportion of national income is re-invested.
7. Capital is formed not only out of profits but also out of credit creation. The real
cost of capital created by inflation is zero in this model, and this capital is just as
useful as what is created in more respectable fashion (i.e. out of profits).
8. Inflation for the purpose of getting hold of resources for war may be cumulative ;
but inflation for the purpose of creating productive capital is self-destructive. Prices
rise as the capital is created, and fall again as its output reaches the market.
9. The capitalist sector cannot expand in these ways indefinitely, since capital
accumulation can proceed faster than population can grow. When the surplus is
exhausted, wages begin to rise above the subsistence level.
10. The country is still, however, surrounded by other countries which have surplus
labour. Accordingly as soon as its wages begin to rise, mass immigration and the
export of capital operate to check the rise.?

29

W.A.Lewis on Development with Unlimited Supplies of Labor
11. Mass immigration of unskilled labour might even raise output per head, but its
effect would be to keep wages in all countries near the subsistence level of the
poorest countries.
12. The export of capital reduces capital formation at home, and so keeps wages
down. This is offset if the capital export cheapens the things which workers import,
or raises wage costs in competing countries. But it is aggravated if the capital
export raises the cost of imports or reduces costs in competing countries.
13. The importation of foreign capital does not raise real wages in countries which
have surplus labour, unless the capital results in increased productivity in the
commodities which they produce for their own consumption.
14. The main reason why tropical commercial produce is so cheap, in terms of the
standard of living it affords, is the inefficiency of tropical food production per man.
Practically all the benefit of increasing efficiency in export industries goes to the
foreign consumer ; whereas raising efficiency in subsistence food production would
automatically make commercial produce dearer.
15. The Law of Comparative Costs is just as valid in countries with surplus labour
as it is in others. But whereas in the latter it is a valid foundation of arguments for
free trade, in the former it is an equally valid foundation of arguments for
protection.
W. Arthur Lewis
Manchester.
* The Manchester School, May (1954).

30

