In the neo-classical era, labour ceased to be unlimited in supply. In over-populated countries the code of ethical behaviour so shapes itself that it becomes good form for each person to offer as much employment as he can. The price of labour, in these economies, is a wage at the subsistence level (we define this later) The supply of labour is therefore “unlimited” so long as the supply of Labour at this price exceeds the demand. In this situation, new industries can be created, or old industries expanded without, limit at the existing wage. There are, however, a number of countries where the current limit is for practical purposes only employment opportunities. For example, in 1939 there were 52 women gainfully employed for every 100 men in the U.K. In South Wales, there were only 15 women gainful employed forevery 100 men. In the Gold Coast, although there is an acute shortage of male labour, any industry which offered employment to women would be a good good. So it comes about that even  2 per cent marginal productivity may be negligible or even zero. If we cease to ask whether the marginal productivity of labour. is negligible and ask instead what would be available if new industries were created offering employment at subsistence wages, the answer becomes even more comprehensive. For only the farmers, casuals, the petty traders, and the wives and daughters of the household can we have three other classes from which to choose to retain employment. First there are all of the wives, and there are also three other groups from which we have also to choose employment. Second there are the other classes, but we have to choose which one we want to retain. Third we have the other two classes, the casuals and the commercial traders. We will not spend time on individual writers, enquiring what they meant, or assessing its validity or truth. Our purpose is rather to bring their framework up-to-date, in the light of modern knowledge, and to see how far it then helps us to understand the contemporary problems of large area of the earth. The goal is to elaborate a different framework for those countries which the neoclassical (and Keynesian) assumptions do not fit. It was thought at first that this was the .book which would illuminate the problems of countries with surplus labour. But Keynesianism is only a footnote to neoclassicism- albeit a long, important and fascinating footnote. The student of such economies has therefore 
 The transfer of women’s work from the household to commercial employment is one of the most notable features of economic development. The second source of labour for expanding industries is the increase in the population resulting from the excess of births and deaths. We are not quite sure why the birth rate in Western Europe has fallen during the last eighty years, but we suspect that it was for reasons associated with development. In any society with a death rate of around 40 per thousand, the effects of economicdevelopment will be to generate an increase in. the supply of labour. In practice, however, labour is not available at a zero wage. Capital will therefore be applied only up to the point where the marginal productivity of labour equals the current wage. As more capital becomes available more workers can be draw into the capitalist sector, and their output per head rises as they move from the one sector to the other. What we have is not one island of expanding capitalist employment, surrounded by a vast sea of subsistence workers. This is very typical of countries in their early stages of development. We find a few industries highly capitalised, such as mining or electric power, but a few high class shops surrounded by masses of old masses of peasants. There are one or two modern towns, with the finest life outside their economic life. But we find the same contrasts also in villages which might almost belong to another planet. There is the difference between the capitalised and the semi-capitalised. We can proceed on the assumption that so long as these are available the necessary skills will be provided as well, though perhaps with some time lag. We note the use of the terms “subsistence’ sector and “s” sector. The capitalist sector is that part of the Economy which uses capital, which pays capitalists for the use thereof. This coincides with Smith’S definition of the productive workers, who are those who work with capital. For it is only a very temporary bottleneck, in the sense that if the capital is for development, the government will soon provide the facilities for training more skilled people. The reallenecks to capital and natural resources available to the capitalists are therefore therefore “the bottom” of the capitalist expansion are therefore ‘subs’sector’ and ‘ Subsistence Economy’. There were only 52 women in the United Kingdom in 1939 whereas there were every 100 women in Lancashire in 2009. We know little. about the 
 Capital and new ideas are not thinly diffused throughout the economy. They are highly concentrated at a number of points, from which they spread outwards. The wage which the expanding capitalist sector has to, pay is determined by what people can earn outside that sector. Inevitably what one gets are very heavily developed patches of the economy, surrounded by economic darkness. The failure of imperialism to improve African agriculture has been negligible. The more efficient firm, instead of competing wherever its real costs are marginally less than its rivals, establishes for itself superior standards of remuneration. It pays its workers more and lavishes welfare services, scholarships and pensions upon them. It demands a higher rate on its marginal investments. Its highest executives spend their time sitting on public committees, and have to have deputies to do their work. When all this is taken into account it is not at all surprising to find a competitive equilibrium in which high cost firms survive side by side with firms of much greater efficiency. The key to the process is the use which is make of the capitalist surplus in so far as this is reinvested in creating new capital. The labour surplus is then larger still, capital formation is still greater still, and so the process continues until the capitalist wage (real money) disappears. To borrow an analogy from the sea, the frontier process now appears not as a beach as a cliff . . . .. the initial stage is the initial surplus’s, the amount of fixed capital is raised now. Now the play begins, and we have merely been setting the stage. For we can now begin to trace the process of economic expansion. In a very highly developed economy the tendency for capital to flow evenly through the economy   There is usually a gap of 30 per cent or more between capitalist wages and subsistence earnings. This gap may be explained in several ways, because of the higher cost of living in the capitalist sector. It is not, however, of great importance to the argument whether earnings are determined objectively by the level of peasant productivity, or subjectively in terms of a conventional standard of living. The minimum at which labour can be had is now set by the average product of the farmer. This objective standard, alas, disappears again if the farmers have to pay rent, and in overpopulated countries the rent will probably be adjusted so as to leave them just enough for a conventional level of subsistence. Whatever the mechanism, the result is an unlimited supply of labour for which this is the minimum level 
 In the neo-classical model capital grows faster than labour, and so one has to ask whether the rate of profit will not fall. Malthus wanted to know what the capitalists would do with this ever-growing surplus; surely this would be an embarrassing glut of commodities? Ricardo replied that there would be no glut; since the supply of labour is unlimited, you can always find employment for any amount of capital. Marx’s interest in the surplus was ethical as well as scientific. He regarded it as robbery of the workers. The surplus, after all, is only partly consumed; the other part is used for capital formation. Even in the U.S.R. all these functionaries are paid out of the surplus, and handsomely paid too. It is arguable that these services are over-paid ; this is why we have pro gressive taxation, and it is also one of the more dubious arguments for nationalisation. We cannot explain any “industrial” revolution (as the economic historians pretend to do) until we can explain why saving increased relatively to national income. The important question is why does the top 10 per cent. save more ? The reason may be because they decide to consume less, but this does not square with the facts. There is no evidence of a fall in personal consumption by the top ten per cent at a time when they do not save any more, though they do spend less on durable goods (tombs and more on productive capital). If we assume that they do save more, at a constant wage, and no hoarding, and unlimited technical progress in agriculture, there is no constant increase in labour at a wage. This is the central problem because the central fact of economic development is rapid capital accumulation. We are not interested in the people in the general, but only in the 10% of them with the largest incomes, who with the large incomes, with the biggest share of the national income in the world. We want to know why they are saving more, and how they are doing it. The answer is that they are not saving any more. The application of new technical knowledge usually requires new investment, and whether the new knowledge is capital-saving (and thus equivalent to an increase in capital) or labour-saving makes no difference to our diagram. In any case, for the purpose of this analysis it is unnecessary to ‘distinguish between capital formation and the growing of knowledge within the capitalist Sector� 
 In countries with surplus labour receive up to 40 per cent of the national income (nearer 30 per cent in more developed countries) The remaining 90 per cent* of the* people never manage to save a significant fraction of their incomes. The reason for this is a striking difference in the disposition of civilisations in which there is a rapid growth of technical knowledge or skills with’ capital. It is possible that the explanation is simply that some psychological change occurs which causes people to be more thrifty. This, however, is not a plausible explanation. The most plausible explanation is that people save more because they have more to save. Practically all saving is done by people who receive profits for rents. Workers’ savings are very small. The middle-classes save a little, but in practically every community the savings of the middle- Classes out of their salaries are of little consequence for productive investment. In the U.K., where the habit is extremely well developed, the annual net increase in insurance funds from all classes, rich, middle, and poor is less than 1.5 per cent. of national income. The central fact of economic development is that the distribution of incomes is altered in favour of the saving class. The expansion of other opportunities present more profitable outlets for investment than do technologically stagnant civilisations, and tempt capital into productive channels rather than into the building of monuments. This is the case in the case of the UK, where the top 10 per. cent. in England were not spending noticeably less on durable consumer goods in 1800 than they were in 1700. This means that more of them are employed at a wage above the subsistence earnings. The process therefore increases the capitalist surplus and the income of capitalist employees   In our model so far capital is created only out of profits earned. We have now also to take account of this neo-classical capital can be created only by withdrawing resources from labour. But in our model however, capital can also be created by withdrawing labour without withdrawing land and capital from other uses. In these days many (e.g. U.S.R., India) are growing a class’ of state who, for one sort or another, are determined to create capital rapidly on public account. These countries cannot afford when capitalists cannot afford to save more, or so much of thenational income is going to the top ten per cent or so. We know that this does not happen. Even if gross margins were constant, profits in 
 Once a capitalist sector has emerged, it is only a matter of time before it becomes sizeable. In point of fact the inequality of income is greater in over-populated under-developed countries than it is in advanced industrial nations. The difference between profit-financed and credit-financing capital is not in the ultimate effects on output, but in’the immediate effects on prices and on the distribution of income. In our model surplus labour cannot be used to make consumer goods without using up more land or capital. In U.S.R. the economy was being transformed from a 5 per cent net saver to a 20 per cent saver. This seems to be just about what happened to the economy in the crucial years when the U.N. was transforming from a net savers’ to a net depositor’s economy. In Keynesian model an increase in capital formation also increases the output more than capital formation, and if the multiplier exceeds 2, the output is increased even more than the capital formation. This means that the inflation continues until profits increase so much relatively to national income that capitalists can now finance the higher rate. It is hard to get away with the expense of the capitalist sector since the wage must stand at a certain minimum level above subsistence earnings. We can give an exact description of this minimum level in our modified classical model in this article. In this model practically the whole benefit of inventions goes into the surplus, and becomes available for further capital accumulation. In the neo-classical model the output of consumer goods is reduced, forcing the community as a whole to save. But in our model, however, consumer goods output is not at any time reduced ; there is a forced redistribution of consumption, but not forced saving. And, of course, as soon as the capital goods begin to yield output, consumption begins to rise. This inflationary process does not go on forever; it comes to an end when voluntary savings increase to a level where they are equal to the inflated level of investment. This is one of those crucial cases where it is important to be certain that one is using the right model when it came to giving advice on economic policy. The equilibrator need not however be profits ; it might equally be government receipts. It may equally be the government receipts, as in the case of the UK, for example, in the form of turnover tax, and by the end of the decade a new equilibrium was in sight. 
 Inflation for purposes of capital formation is self-destructive. Prices begin to rise, but are sooner or later overtaken by rising output. The larger the government’s share of foreign transactions, the more it will play havoc with the balance of payments. No government should consider deficit financing without assuring itself that a large part of money increases in money will automatically come back. By contrast, in the U.S.R., with its high rate of tax, mops up surplus funds automatically, with no need for deficit financing. We hope that this will help you to understand the current state of our economy and the prospects for the future. We will end the series with a look at how the UK has been affected by the crisis and the impact it has had on the eurozone and the UK in the short-term, as well as the implications on the future of the EU and the US for the Euro. The book is also available in the UK at £9.99 or by clicking here: http::// www.dailymail.co.uk/books/the-social-contract/ The-Social-Contradictory-Convention-by-George- Orwell, £11.99, or call the phone on 08457 90 90 90. The first section of the article is a summary of the Keynesian formula for a demand inflation. The second is a discussion on the impact on prices of credit created by credit creation. The third and final part will be on the economy in theUK and the rest of the world. The fourth and final section will be about the world and the role of the Bank of England in the economy. It will also look at some of the implications of the crisis for the UK, and for the world as a whole. The last section will focus on the effects on the UK of the European financial crisis and on the implications for the US of the Eurozone and the world of the eurozone in the long-term. The Social Contract by George Orwell, published by Oxford University Press, is published by Macmillan, priced £12.99. To order a copy of the book, visit: http://www.mailonline.co.,uk/ books/George Orwell, The Social contract, £12-£11-99.    The first part of the series of articles on the state of the British economy is at the bottom of the page and can be downloaded from the Daily Mail website. 
 The effects of inflation on secondary capital formation depend on how large the industrial class is. In countries which have only a small industrial class, inflation leads mainly to speculation in commodities and in land. But in any country which has a substantial industrialist class, even the most frightening inflations leave behind a substantial increase in capital formation. Inflation continues to be generated so long as the community is not willing to hold an amount equal to the increased investment expenditure. To end inflation as soon as possible, all classes should be encouraged to invest in government bonds rather than to spend in other ways. The surplus money raises prices, some more than others. The government will probably try to prevent prices from rising, but will succeed better with some than with others. To finance school building by creating credit is asking for trouble. It would be much sounder to pursue policies which would result in the profits of the capitalists rising more rapidly than other incomes, and then to tax these profits away. If this is not possible, then it is better that   "I will be more for a bit of something to be seen for a number of years to come, before they are able to generate inflation via the multiplier" The next question is the effect of inflation upon the various classes. What effect does inflation have upon the different classes? And (3) What effect has government capital formation upon output? The results lie within two extremes. At one extreme all the money spent by the government comes back to it in taxes, and this is accepted by all classes. At the other extreme, all Classes refuse to accept a redistribution between themselves and the government. In this case prices tend to rise continuously, except that rising output (as a result of the capital formed) sooner or later catches up with prices and brings them down again. The best placed governments are those in countries where output is concentrated in a few large units (mines, plantations) or where foreign trade is a large parts of the national income, and is thus easily reached by import and export duties. One of the worst off is India, with a large part of its output produced by subsistence producers and small scale units, hard to reach, and with less than ten per cent of national income passing in foreign trade. This is one of the major reasons why their price levels have not risen more, despite heavy pressure on resources for capital formation, defence, etc. It is easy to apply price control to large scale enterprises, but very hard to prevent the farmers 
 In Japan this was achieved by raising rents against the farmers, and by taxing them more heavily, so that a large part of the rapid increase in productivity which occurred (between 1880 and 1910 it doubled) was taken away from the farmers and used for capital formation. Much the same happened in the U.S.R., where farm incomes per head were held down, in spite of farm mechanisation and the considerable release of labour to the towns. This also defines for us the case in which it is true to say that it is agriculture which finances industrialisation. By contrast a state which is ruled by peasants may be happy and prosperous, but it is not likely to show a rapid accumulation of capital. We conclude, therefore, that the Expansion of the Capitalist Sector is in no way dependent upon the peasants. The surplus is wholly “at the expense” of the workers in the capitalistsector. The expansion of thecapitalist sector may be stopped because the price of subsistence goods rises, or not as fast as the subsistence price falls. This assumes that the capitalist and subsistence sectors are producing different things. In practice, however, this is not the case, and it is more likely to be the case that they are producing the same thing, but at different levels of production. In this case we conclude that industrialisation can only happen if the capitalist surplus, their wages can be reduced relatively relatively quickly. This is one of the senses in which industrialisation is dependent upon agricultural improvement. It is not profitable to produce a growing volume of manufactures unless agricultural production is growing simultaneously. This means that the capitalists depend on the peasants for food, it is essential to get the peasants to produce more, while at the same time they can be prevented from enjoying the full fruit of their extra production. The capitalist surplus is essential for industrialisation to continue, but only if the peasants are able to enjoy the full fruits of their own production, while their wages are reduced relatively quickly, as in the case of Japan. This leads us to the question of the relationship between industry and agriculture, and the role of the capitalist sector in the development of the world economy. The answer to this question is that the answer is not to think of the capitalists as self-contained, but of the other way around, and of the role played by the peasants in the evolution of the global economy, and how they interact with each other. The question is how do we make the world a better place for all of us 
 In the classical world all countries have surplus labour, but in the neo-classical world labour is scarce in all countries. In the real world, countries which achieve labour scarcity continue to be surrounded by others which have abundant labour. When capital accumulation catches up with the labour supply, wages begin to rise above the subsistence level, and the capitalist surplus is adversely affected. If none of these processes is enough to stop capital accumulation, the capitalist sector will continue to expand until there is no surplus labour left. This can happen even if population is growing. For example, if it takes 3 per cent of annual income invested to employ 1 per cent more people, an annual net investment of 12 per cent can cope with as much as a 4 per cent increase in population. This leads to the conclusion that agriculture is the key to industrialisation, and that it should be the main source of wealth and power. We therefore conclude that it must   In the classicalworld all countries has surplus labour. But we can say that if conditions are favourable for thecapitalist surplus to grow more rapidly than population, there must come a day when capital accumulation has caught up with labour supply. If 100,000 Puerto Ricans emigrate to the United States every year, the effect on U.S. wages is negligible. In a competitive model the Indian and Chinese wage levels would certainly be pulled down towards the Chinese levels in a competitive business model. In fact, if there were free immigration from India and China to the US., the wage level of the US.A. would be the same as in the Chinese and Indian countries. The effect of exporting capital is to reduce the creation of fixed capital at home, and therefore to reduce demand for labour. The result is that real wages are higher than they would otherwise be, while profits, capital resources, and total output are smaller than they will otherwise be. The most productive investments are those which are made to open up rich, easily accessible natural resources, such as fertile soil, ores, coal or oil. In well developed parts of the world the main opportunity for’ productive investment lies in improving techniques. These countries are well (even over-) developed in the resource sense, but under-developed in their techniques. It is profitable to use capital to introduce new techniques, but this is not as profitable as using capital to make available both new techniques and also new resources. This also explains why the United Kingdom rapidly became a capital exporting country (the limits of 
 Exports of capital is not inevitably falling home profits, or rising wages at home, but simply the fact that foreign countries having different resources unutilised in different degrees. It may be more profitable to invest capital in countries which already have a lot of capital than to invest it in a new country. For example, the productivity of investment in. B depends on not only its human resources but also its human institutions. Differences in literacy, forms of government, attitudes to work, and social relations generally may make a big difference to productivity. The export ofcapital is therefore a much easier way out for the capitalists. But in practice capital export is small, and the gap does widen. We must therefore beware of saying that a country will begin to export capital as soon as capital accumulation at home catches up with labour supply. When capital is being invested in A, and raising the output of wheat, the price of peanuts will rise relatively. But when capital is invested in B the opposite happens : the terms of trade are moved against the B workers in favour of the A workers. The moral is that capital export may benefit the workers on balance if it is applied to increasing the supply of things they import. We have here the key to the question why tropical produce is so cheap. The reason is that wages in the sugar industry are related to the fact. that the subsistence sectors of tropical economies are able to release however many workers the Sugar industry may want, at wages which are low. are used. However vastly productive the. sugar industry may become, the benefit accrues chiefly to industrial purchasers in the form of lower prices for sugar. To raise the. price of sugar you must increase the. productivity of the tropical food. Now the contribution of the temperate world in capital or in the main is mainly confined to export economies where the commercial crops for export have been used. The benefit is mainly accruing. in the case of sugar, which is mainly used for commercial crops. It has been 25 years since the main export economies in the world have been able to make a profit on capital. This is the main reason why the world has been in a state of economic crisis since the 1930s. It is also the reason why we are now in the midst of the Great Depression, and it is the cause of the current economic crisis. We can say that if labour is scarce in those countries, the effect is to reduce the demand for labour in those country and thus to prevent 
 The benefits of this are largely due to the low production costs in the tropical world, and the low labour costs of producing these crops in the tropics. This is the reason why workers in sugar continue to walk barefooted and to live in shacks, while workers in wheat enjoy among the highest living standards in the world. The analysis applies to all tropical commercial products of which an unlimited supply can be produced because unlimited natural resources exist. It does not apply where natural resources of a particular kind are scarce. tropical commercial crops will always permit only subsistence wages until, for a change, capital and knowledge are put at the disposal of the subsistence producers to increase the productivity of tropical food production for home consumption. This divergence between the actual and what it ought to be is the most serious difference which the existence of surplus labour makes to the neo-classical theory of international trade. Adam Smith was as usual on the ball; this was the substance of his argument that a tariff could not raise the national income even if it increased employment. Many manufacturing activities do not in fact use any other scarce resource but labour. The handicraft and cottage industries especially, which may provide employment for up to ten per cent. of the people in backward countries, use no capital resources to speak of. These are the industries to be destroyed by cheap imports of manufactures (e.g. the Indian cotton industry in the nineteenth century). The Law of Comparative Costs, rightly. applied, enables us to predict the pattern of internationaltrade. We can say that that countries can be ‘cheaper’ to export food and import cotton. The whole benefit of increasing product v ty in the commercial sector goes to the foreign consumer, at least in the ear y s ages. The difference in wages between the two is the difference in the difference between the wages of capitalist and subsistence workers in A and B. In both cases, the wage cannot fall below productivity in the food industry. In practice, wages will be 2 food in B and between 3 food and 6 food in A, at which levels it will be “cheaper ’ for B to exportFood and import Cotton in A. In A production of food and cotton manufacturing in B is equivalent to 1 day’s labour in A or 2 days labour in B 2 „ or 1’ or 2 “ or 3 “ in the next case we assume that the two countries are the same, and that they can produce same things. 
 If the world capitalist sector is not dependent on the peasants for food, an increase in the productivity of the peasants must raise wages against the capitalists. If we assume that the capitalists need the peasants’ food, and that the increased demand for food is inelastic, then increased productivity reduces the price of food even and so reduces the share of the capitalist product. This assumes that the changes are world-wide; if one country raises its productivity, and wages will rise in that country, and capitalists will move elsewhere. But if the price falls, even if the prices of food falls, the peasants eat most of their peasants' food and so reduce the market share of capitalist workers. This again assumes the changes in the world economy are worldwide; and if the world- wide changes in productivity will not fall, the wages of workers will not rise; and so the capitalist share in the market will fall. We may conclude as follows. Capital export tends to reduce wages in capital exporting countries. This is wholly or partly offset if the capital is applied to cheapening the things which the workers import, or to raising wage costs in 28 countries which compete in third markets. ‘The neo-classical model (including the Keynesian) when applied to such economies gives erroneous results’ ‘Capital formation and technical progress result not in raising wages, but in raising share of profits in the national income.‘ ‘‘The reason why savings are low in an undeveloped economy relatively to national income is not that the people are poor, but that capitalist profits are low relatively toNational income. As the capitalist sector expands, profits grow relatively, and an increasing proportion of national income are re-invested.” ‘Inflation for the purpose of getting hold of resources may be respectable for war, but it is self-destructive as the rise in prices rises and falls again as its output reaches the market. ‚  ‘. The real cost of capital created by inflation is zero in this model, and this capital is just as useful as what is created in more fashion (i.e. out of profits) out of credit creation.   “The capitalist sector cannot expand indefinitely, since capital accumulation can only expand in these ways indefinitely. ” “. In many economies an unlimited supply of labour is available at a subsistence wage. This was the classical model. In such an economy employment expands in a capitalist sector as capital 
 1. 4; 2. 4,. 3; 2,5, 5; 4,4, 4:5, 6,. 5; 5,6, 6; 3,4.3,. 4., 5, 5,. 5,5. 6; 4.4, 5., 6.2,. 3,. 5,. 4,. 2,. 4; 3.5,. 4:3. 2). 3. 1,. 2, 2,. 3, 3,. 4, 1. 5. 4. 1, 2, 3, 2. 2, 1, 3. 3, 4, 4. 4:1,3,. 6:2,. 6,. 4%, 5,7,6,. 6;4.4%, 5.6.5% 4.5%, 4.3% 4,3%. 5.1,. 4th, 5%. 4,2,4; 5.3%, 6.6, 5%, 6,3,6.4%. 5,3.4., 6,2.5%. 4.2, 3; 4,. 5:2.3; 4;4,5,. 6,4,. 6.1,5; 6.3%; 4.1; 4:2, 4th,. 5%; 5.4%; 5,2., 6,. 2.5%; 4;. 2; 2; 3; 3.; 3. 2., 3.3, 4., 2.2; 2:3, 5:4, 6:4. 3,. 1.4. 2,. 2.; 3,. 2., 2., 4, 3., 4. 5,. 2). 4,. 4. 2.; 4. 3; 1. 4.; 1. 3.; 1; 2.; 2; 1; 3,. 3.; 2, 4; 1, 4.; 2. 3. 4., 3, 5. 2. 1. 2:1. 3:1,. 3:2; 1:3,. 3. 5:3; 2,. 5. 5; 3:4,. 4.; 3:5. 5, 6. 5.; 2:4; 3.:3. 5%; 2:5; 2.:4. 5%. 1. 1: 2, 5, 3: 2. 6:1; 2., 5,. 3.:2,. 4%; 2. 5., 4; 4.; 4; 5., 5.2. 2.:1. 
 
