In over-populated countries the code of ethical behaviour so shapes itself that it becomes good form for each person to offer as much employment as he can. The transfer of women’s work from the household to commercial employment is one of the most notable features of economic development. The second source of labour for expanding industries is the increase in the population resulting from the excess of births and deaths. As more capital becomes available more workers can be draw into the capitalist sector, and their output per head rises as they move from the one sector to the other. What we have is not one island of expanding capitalist employment, surrounded by a vast sea of subsistence workers. This is very typical of countries in their early stages of development. We find a few industries highly capitalised, such as mining or electric power, but a few high class shops surrounded by masses of old masses of peasants. There are one or two modern towns, with the finest life outside their economic life. But we find the same contrasts also in villages which might almost belong to another planet. We can proceed on the assumption that so long as these are available the necessary skills will be provided as well, though perhaps with some time lag. We note the use of the terms “subsistence’ sector’ and “s” sector. The capitalist sector is that part of the Economy which pays capitalists for the use thereof. This coincides with Smith’S definition of the productive workers, who are those who work only with capital. The government will soon provide the more skilled people with training facilities to re-allen the natural resources available to the capitalists. The goal is to elaborate a different framework for those countries which the neoclassical (and Keynesian) assumptions do not fit. It was thought at first that this was the .book which would illuminate the problems of countries with surplus labour. But Keynesianism is only a footnote to neoclassicism- albeit a long, important and fascinating footnote. In practice, however, labour is not available at a zero wage. We are not quite sure why the birth rate in Western Europe has fallen during the last eighty years, but we suspect that it was for reasons associated with development. If we cease to ask whether the marginal productivity of labour is negligible and ask instead what would be available if new industries were created offering employment at subsistence wages, the answer becomes even more comprehensive. In the Gold Coast, although there is an acute shortage of male labour, 
 Capital and new ideas are not thinly diffused throughout the economy. They are highly concentrated at a number of points, from which they spread outwards. The wage which the expanding capitalist sector has to, pay is determined by what people can earn outside that sector. In a very highly developed economy the tendency for capital to flow evenly through the economy   There is usually a gap of 30 per cent or more between capitalist wages and subsistence earnings. The key to the process is the use which is make of the capitalist surplus in so far as this is reinvested in creating new capital. The labour surplus is then larger still, capital formation is still greater still, and so the process continues until the capitalist wage (real money) disappears. We cannot explain any “industrial” revolution (as the economic historians pretend to do) until we can explain why saving increased relatively to national income. The important question is why does the top 10 per cent save more ? The reason may be because they decide to consume less, but this does not square with the facts. There is no evidence of a fall in personal consumption by the top ten per cent at a time when they do not save any more. If we assume that they do save more, and no unlimited technical progress in labour at a constant wage, there is no constant increase in wage. We are not interested in the general people in general, but only in the 10% of them with the largest incomes. There were only 52 women in the United Kingdom in 1939 whereas there were every 100 women in Lancashire in 2009. The failure of imperialism to improve African agriculture has been negligible. The more efficient firm, instead of competing wherever its real costs are marginally less than its rivals, establishes for itself superior standards of remuneration. It pays its workers more and lavishes welfare services, scholarships and pensions upon them. It demands a higher rate on its marginal investments. Its highest executives spend their time sitting on public committees, and have to have deputies to do their work. When all this is taken into account it is not at all surprising to find a competitive equilibrium in which high cost firms survive side by side with firms of much greater efficiency. The minimum at which labour can be had is now set by the average product of the farmer. This objective standard, alas, disappears again if the farmers have to pay rent, and in overpopulated countries the rent will probably be adjusted so as to leave them just enough for a conventional level of 
 In countries with surplus labour receive up to 40 per cent of the national income (nearer 30 per cent in more developed countries) The remaining 90 per cent* of the* people never manage to save a significant fraction of their incomes. The application of new technical knowledge usually requires new investment, and whether the new knowledge is capital-saving (and thus equivalent to an increase in capital) or labour-saving makes no difference to our diagram. In the U.K., where the habit is extremely well developed, the annual net increase in insurance funds from all classes, rich, middle, and poor is less than 1.5 per cent. of national income. In these days many (e.g. U.S.R., India) are growing a class’ of state who, for one sort or another, are determined to create capital rapidly on public account. These countries cannot afford when capitalists cannot afford to save more, or so much of thenational income is going to the top ten per cent or so. We know that this does not happen. Even if gross margins were constant, profits in   Once a capitalist sector has emerged, it is only a matter of time before it becomes sizeable. In point of fact the inequality of income is greater in over-populated under-developed countries than it is in advanced industrial nations. The expansion of other opportunities present more profitable outlets for investment than do technologically stagnant civilisations, and tempt capital into productive channels rather than into the building of monuments. This is the case in the case of the UK, where the top 10 per. cent. in England were not spending noticeably less on durable consumer goods in 1800 than they were in 1700. We have now also to take account of this neo-classical capital can be created only by withdrawing resources from labour. But in our model however, capital can also be created by withdrawing labour without withdrawing land and capital from other uses. In our model surplus labour cannot be used to make consumer goods without using up more land or capital. This means that more of them are employed at a wage above the subsistence earnings. The process therefore increases the capitalist surplus and the income of capitalist employees. The whole benefit of inventions goes into the surplus, and becomes available for further capital accumulation. In this model practically the output of consumer goods is reduced, and the output is reduced. We can give an exact description of this classical model in our modified model in this article. The central fact of economic development 
 Inflation for purposes of capital formation is self-destructive. The larger the government’s share of foreign transactions, the more it will play havoc with the balance of payments. No government should consider deficit financing without assuring itself that a large part of money increases in money will automatically come back. To end inflation as soon as possible, all classes should be encouraged to invest in government bonds rather than to spend in other ways. The effects of inflation on secondary capital formation depend on how large the industrial class is. In countries which have only a small industrial class, inflation leads mainly to speculation in commodities and in land. But in any country which has a substantial industrialist class, even the most frightening inflations leave behind a substantial increase in capital formation. The Social Contract by George Orwell, published by Oxford University Press, is published by Macmillan, priced £12.99. To order a copy of the book, visit: http://www.mailonline.co.uk/ books/George Orwell, The Social contract, £12-£11-99. The first part of the series of articles on the state of the British economy is at the bottom of the page and can be downloaded from the Daily Mail website. The second is a discussion on the impact on prices of credit created by credit creation. The third and final part will be on the economy in theUK and the rest of the world. The fourth and final section will be about the world and the role of the Bank of England in the economy. It will also look at some of the implications of the crisis for the UK, and for the world as a whole. The last section will focus on the effects on the UK of the European financial crisis and on the implications for the US of the Eurozone and the world of the eurozone in the long-term. We hope that this will help you to understand the current state of our economy and the prospects for the future. If you have any questions about this article, please call the phone on 08457 90 90 90 or visit the Mail Online website at: http::// www.dailymail.co.,uk/books/the-social-contract/ The-Social-Contradictory-Convention-by-George- Orwell, £11.99, or by clicking here: http www.daily Mail.co,.uk/ Books/George-Orwell-The-Social Contract by Orwell, £ 
 In the classical world all countries have surplus labour, but in the neo-classical world labour is scarce in all countries. In the real world, countries which achieve labour scarcity continue to be surrounded by others which have abundant labour. When capital accumulation catches up with the labour supply, wages begin to rise above the subsistence level, and the capitalist surplus is adversely affected. We conclude, therefore, that the Expansion of the Capitalist Sector is in no way dependent upon the peasants. The surplus is wholly “at the expense” of the workers in the capitalistsector. This is one of the senses in which industrialisation is dependent upon agricultural improvement. It is not profitable to produce a growing volume of manufactures unless agricultural production is growing simultaneously. This means that the capitalists depend on the peasants for food, it is essential to get the peasants to produce more, while at the same time they can be prevented from enjoying the full fruit of their extra production. This also defines for us the case in which it is true to say that it is agriculture which finances industrialisation. By contrast a state which is ruled by peasants may be happy and prosperous, but it is not likely to show a rapid accumulation of capital. For example, if it takes 3 per cent of annual invested to employ 4 per cent more people, an annual net investment of 12 per cent can cope with a much much increase in income as a 1 per cent increase in agriculture. This leads to the conclusion that the key to industrialisation should be that it should be the government capital formation upon output. The question is how do we make the world a better place for all of us   In the classical World all countries had surplus labour. But in the Neo-Classical World, labour is scarcity in all country, and this can happen even if there is no surplus labour left. The answer is not to think of the capitalists as self-contained, but of the role played by the peasants in the evolution of the global economy, and how they interact with each other. The best placed governments are those in countries where output is concentrated in a few large units (mines, plantations) or where foreign trade is a large parts of the national income, and is thus easily reached by import and export duties. In Japan this was achieved by raising rents against the farmers, and by taxing them more heavily, so that a large part of the rapid increase in productivity which occurred (between 1880 and 1910 it doubled) was taken away from 
 If 100,000 Puerto Ricans emigrate to the United States every year, the effect on U.S. wages is negligible. If there were free immigration from India and China to the US., the wage level of the US.A. would be the same as in the Chinese and Indian countries. The effect of exporting capital is to reduce the creation of fixed capital at home, and therefore to reduce demand for labour. It has been 25 years since the main export economies in the world have been able to make a profit on capital. This is the main reason why the world has been in a state of economic crisis since the 1930s. It is also the reason why we are now in the midst of the Great Depression, and it is the cause of the current economic crisis. We conclude that it must   In the classicalworld all countries has surplus labour. But we can say that if conditions are favourable for thecapitalist surplus to grow more rapidly than population, there must come a day when capital accumulation has caught up with labour supply. We must therefore beware of saying that a country will begin to export capital as soon as capital accumulation at home catches up with Labour supply. It may be more profitable to invest capital in countries which already have a lot of capital than to invest it in a new country. For example, the productivity of investment in. B depends on not only its human resources but also its human institutions. Differences in literacy, forms of government, attitudes to work, and social relations generally may make a big difference to productivity. The export ofcapital is therefore a much easier way out for the capitalists. But in practice capital export is small, and the gap does widen. The moral is that capital export may benefit the workers on balance if it is applied to increasing the supply of things they import. To raise the. price of sugar you must increase the. productivity of the tropical food. The benefit is mainly accruing. in the case of sugar, which is mainly used for commercial crops. The benefits of this are largely due to the low production costs in the tropical world, and low labour costs of these crops in the tropics. The analysis applies to all tropical products of which an unlimited supply can be produced. This explains why workers in sugar continue to walk barefooted to live in shacks and live in wheat shacks. Workers in sugar are the main source of wealth and power. This also explains why the United Kingdom rapidly became a capital exporting country. 
 Adam Smith was as usual on the ball; this was the substance of his argument that a tariff could not raise the national income even if it increased employment. Many manufacturing activities do not in fact use any other scarce resource but labour. The Law of Comparative Costs, rightly applied, enables us to predict the pattern of internationaltrade. Capital export tends to reduce wages in capital exporting countries. This is wholly or partly offset if the capital is applied to cheapening the things which the workers import, or to raising wage costs in 28 countries which compete in third markets. ‘Inflation for the purpose of getting hold of resources may be respectable for war, but it is self-destructive as the rise in prices rises and falls again as its output reaches the market. ‚  ‘. The real cost of capital created by inflation is zero in this model, and this capital is just as useful as what is created in more fashion (i.e. out of profits) out of credit.   “The capitalist sector cannot expand indefinitely, since capital accumulation can only expand in these ways indefinitely. ” “ In many economies an unlimited labour is available at a subsistence wage. produced because unlimited natural resources exist. It does not apply where natural resources of a particular kind are scarce. tropical commercial crops will always permit only subsistence wages until, for a change, capital and knowledge are put at the disposal of the subsistence producers to increase the productivity of tropical food production for home consumption.’ ‘The neo-classical model (including the Keynesian) when applied to such economies gives erroneous results’‘The reason why savings are low in an undeveloped economy relatively to national income is not that the people are poor, but that capitalist profits are low relatively toNational income.” ‘ ‘‘ “Capital formation and technical progress result not in raising wages, but in raising share of profits in the national Income. “ “”” '‘’ '“The whole benefit of increasing product v ty in the commercial sector goes to the foreign consumer, at least in the ear y s ages. The difference in wages between the two is the difference in the difference between the wages of capitalist and subsistence workers in A and B.“  'In practice, wages will be 2 food in B and between 3 food and 6 food in A, at which levels it will be “ 
 1: 2, 5, 3: 2. 6:1; 2., 5,. 3.:2,. 4%; 2. 5., 4; 4.; 4; 5., 5. 2:1. 3:1,. 3:2; 1:3,. 3. 5:3; 2,. 5. 5; 3:4,. 4.; 3:5. 5, 6. 5.; 2:4; 3.:3. 5%; 2:5; 2.:4. 5%. 1. 1,. 2, 2,. 3,. 3, 3,. 4, 4, 1. 4:1,3,. 6:2,. 6,. 4%, 5,7,6,. 6;4.4%, 5.6. 5.1,. 4th, 5%. 4,2,4; 5.3%, 6.6, 5%, 6,3,6.4%. 5,3.4., 6,2.5%. 4.2, 3; 4,. 5:2.3; 4;4,5,. 6,4,. 6.1,5; 6.3%; 4.1; 4:2, 4th,. 5%; 5.4%; 5,2., 6,. 2.5%; 4;. 2; 2; 3; 3.; 3. 2., 3.3, 4., 2.2; 2:3, 5:4, 6:4. 3,. 1.4. 2,. 2.; 3,. 2., 2., 4, 3., 4. 5,. 2). 4,. 4. 2.; 4. 3; 1. 3.; 1; 2.; 2; 1; 3,.3.; 2, 4; 1, 4.; 2. 3. 4., 3, 5. 4. 1, 2, 3, 2. 2, 1, 3. 3, 4. 4, 5,. 4:3. 2). 3. 1. 2. 4,. 2,. 4,. 3; 2. 1; 1,. 1, 1: 1. 6. 3., 1. 7,. 1: 2,. 1.: 1. 8,. 1,. 3., 3,. 5,. 5, 2., 1: 4, 2.: 2. 7. 2.). 3. 6, 6, 5., 6. 6; 4.5%, 4.3% 4,3%. 5.2. 5%, 4,4. 
 
